Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel... Douglas Ross, MP since 2017. He left the Government in protest after the behaviour of the Dominik —— of Dominic Cummings, the Dominik -- of Dominic Cummings, Boris johnson’s the Dominik —— of Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s adviser. Joining us down the line from London, Seema Malhotra, a former and then to become the Government’s first female Finance Secretary. If“: Kate Forbes, NSP for Kate Forbes, NSP forformat Kate Forbes, NSP for format years. The Government’s first female Finance Secretary. Also, joining the debate via video link, Professor Mark Walport, member of Sage, the Government’s scientific advisory group, and immunologist, former director of the Wellcome Trust and former chief scientific adviser to the Government. management consultant, adviser to Harriet Harman and Shadow Treasury Minister And a man who rose in the oil industry made for mischievous philanthropic work, Ian Wood. Good evening. Welcome to my guests in the studio and to Seema and Mark, joining down the line, and of course to our audience again joining joining down the line, and of course to our audience againjoining by to our audience again joining by video link, to our audience againjoining by video link, very good to have US us. Tonight you are all from Edinburgh and the Edinburgh area. Thank you for you forjoining, and of course to you at home watching, if you want to join in as well, you know how to do it, on social media and at Question Time, join the conversation and debate does not let here our first question tonight, which is Diane Craig... Thank you, Fiona. Do you think that this pandemic has been managed better by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than it has by Boris Johnson in England ﬂ I think it is certainly not a competition. It is about managing how to balance that with managing the other harms, whether social, health or economic. With the polling health or economic. with the polling this health or economic. With the polling this week we have seen three quarters of people in Scotland are satisfied and how Nicola Sturgeon has handled the pandemic is do you think she has handled it better than Boris think she has handled it better than BorisJohnson? I think she has handled it in a remarkable way. I handled it in a remarkabla way. I think it is handled it in a remarkable way. I think it is one of the most challenging situations for any leader to bn and at the beginning she said we would make mistakes and she has been upfront throughout, with honesty and integrity, that things have been challenging. Scotland has a higher infection growth rate than in England and the UK as a whole. Sire might but we UK as a whola. Sire might but we also have UK as a whole. Sire might but we also have the lowest rates per hundred thousand than anywhere in the UK and those are the figures that matter. We know because we suppressed it so low during the summer and schools and universities went back earlier, we are seeing the went back eartier, we are seeing the figures increase, went back earlier, we are seeing the figures increase, which is why early figures increase, which is why earty action is key to figures increase, which is why early action is key to avoiding a complete lockdown, and I think Nicola Sturgeon has done that. Certainly this week’s figures in terms of dissatisfaction with the Prime Minister, in Scotland it is very high. It’s almost the inverse — 76% are dissatisfied with the way the Prime Minister’s handled it — but from my perspective the challenge for every Government, notjust in the UK but across the world, is to suppress the virus, to keep the trust of the people, and to ensure that we manage these other harms in terms of the economy or society more widely. Well, Diane’s question is very pointed. Who is managing it better, Nicola Sturgeon or BorisJohnson? Douglas Ross? I don’t think anyone can treat this as a competition... But that is the question. ..when people continue to lose their lives, when people continue to be infected at an alarming rate. But I think we do have to look across the UK. There has been similar approach taken by all four governments, and indeed around the world we are still learning about this virus. A virus that didn’t even exist this time last year. There have the mistakes, and big mistakes, in Scotland, and we’ve got to accept that and listen to the advice we’re hearing when these mistakes are made, and learn from them, because in Scotland we had people testing positive for Covid—19 in a hospital being discharged into a care home. We can’t allow that to happen. We’ve got to learn from that. And Nicola Sturgeon told us we would learn from this and there would be a report in September. We are still waiting in October for that. We have the highest percentage of deaths in the care home setting anywhere in the UK here in Scotland. So no one can claim a success. It is a battle that we are all still fighting, it is one that continues to take lives, it is one we are still trying to get on top of, and that’s just the health battle — we’ve also got the economic hotspots to deal with as well. And are you satisfied with the way BorisJohnson is handling the pandemic? There have been mistakes by the UK Government, by the Scottish Government, by governments around the world. There have been errors made, and at some time... So what do you think the UK Government has done wrong? At something we will look back and say, "This should have been done differently", but I don’t think anyone objectively can look at what has happened in Scotland and see what has been the big difference. What has the Scottish Government done differently from the rest of the UK? There are areas where I think the Scottish Government have to learn, for example testing positive people for Covid—19 in hospital and then putting them into a care home. That was the worst thing that could have happened. Humzah, in ouraudience, you’ve got your hand up. Hi. So with regards to mistakes and Nicole Sturgeon, what is the concrete evidence that the First Minister has used in justifying her decision to crush the hospitality sector and saying that the recent spike in cases have come directly from pubs, bars and restaurants? OK. I will let you come back in. I’m just going to deal with the main question here from Diane, which is "Has this pandemic been managed better by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than it has by BorisJohnson in England?" And neither of you say... Neither want to say, and you’re both at pains to point out it’s not a competition, because it does matter to people who has handled it well because lives are at stake. Mark, do you feel that either government is listening to you, to the advice you are giving at Sage? I’ve got no doubt that the governments are listening, and I’ve also got no doubt that everyone’s trying as hard as they possibly can. Yes, I’ve got no doubt that they are listening to the advice, the scientific advice, they are getting, but frankly I think the wrong question is being asked because it’s not internal comparisons, it is actually looking at other countries that are doing well. 50 South Korea, Vietnam, Germany. I think what we have to do is learn from what’s working well in other countries, and frankly I think it would be easier if there was a bit more commonality in the approach across all of the nations of the UK. And also we saw the advice that was released by Sage this week, the advice that was given to the governments on the 21st of September. From what we can see, neither the Scottish Government nor the UK Government are following much of the advice that Sage was giving? Well, they are following some of it, but the bottom line of course is that Sage is looking purely through the lens of controlling the pandemic, and they’re also having to balance the very difficult tightrope of the miserable health consequences for other people as well, which is the effects of the economic damage, the unemployment, the damage to education. But I think what we have to do is we need a really clear strategy, and I think that’s been less visible. What we have to do, frankly, is learn to live with the virus whilst working on the therapeutics and vaccines. And we’ve got to get it under control, but keep it under control with much better public health logistic delivery. Lucas, you’ve got your hand up. Yeah, so none of the panellists have actually been able to answer, really, who has performed better, Nicola Sturgeon or Borisjohnson, and of course it’s a horrendously difficult period for both of them, but why, and can they explain the disparity between public opinion in how they’ve handled it? Clearly, people believe that Nicola Sturgeon has performed so much better. Grant, you’ve got your hand up. Yeah, I just wanted to follow on from what Douglas was saying, and exactly what Lucas was saying. If both Holyrood and Westminster have both made mistakes, is there a lesson to be learned for the UK Government in the way that the public are receiving Holyrood and Nicole Sturgeon so favourably? Seema Malhotra, who do you think has performed better out of the two? I think we are in a decisive moment in our efforts to tackle the coronavirus, and the numbers are clearly moving in the wrong direction, and that’s across Scotland as well as England, and my worry is that neither government is learning from the mistakes that were made very earty on. The UK Government, it seems to me, has lost control of the virus. They are losing confidence, and there are no longer They are losing confidence, and they are no longer following scientific advice. We’ve also not seen Nicola Sturgeon come forward to follow the scientific advice that came through in the way that it did from Sage. And, under the SNP Government, you’ve already mentioned that we’ve got the highest R rate in the UK. Both governments were far too slow in setting up test, track and isolate, or Test and Protect, and my worry is that with those businesses and livelihoods at stake now, if we don’t have a way in which both governments are going to learn from what’s gone wrong and be honest and open about it and work together more closely, we’re going to see us going into a winter where it’s going to be much more difficult for all of us. That’s why Labour has called this week, as you know, for a 2—3 week circuit break, in line with Sage advice. And what does that mean, Seema? Sorry to interrupt, but what does that mean, circuit break? How would you define that? It is in what Sage has also said, that it would be more along the lines of where we were in May with people staying at home, but there can be variations on that because we are further forward. And what’s been very clearfrom Keir Starmer, and from the Labour Party, is that we need to keep schools open, and I think that is fairly universally felt, that we should do what we can to keep schools open, but if we are to have a circuit break and that means to setback the virus by maybe 28 days, it’s estimated, the estimate also being that we could save 8,000 lives because we get it under control prior to Christmas and we protect the NHS in doing that. Surely that’s got to be advise that we listen to, because if we delay, as the Government has repeatedly, then the consequences will be far greater, both in terms of impact on jobs and livelihoods, but also on the nation’s health and the number of deaths. And do you support what the Mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, is saying? A Labour man, obviously, in terms of he doesn’t want to see further lockdown in his area, despite what you’re saying? Well, I’ve been in touch with Andy, and I think one of the critical things has been that it hasn’t felt that the evidence on which those decisions are being made and the way in which local leaders are involved has been anywhere near what we need to see, and Ijust don’t understand why we have both a UK Government that is over many years seen cuts to local Government, that has made local government less resilient, and also the Scottish Government has cut funding to local government in Scotland by much more than has been cut in terms of budgets from Westminster. You know, this lack of resilience has made it increasingly difficult, but what we’ve seen is that local authorities, when they have been able to go about track and trace, have actually been doing far better than Serco and others on whom the Government is spending 12 billion, so there’s a real question of confidence... 0K. . . ..and engagement with local leaders. And also, the key thing, that financial support has to go hand in hand with those restrictions, and the Government has not had the trust of local authorities and local leaders that that is happening. Ian, there’s a great reluctance to answer the question which Diane has put, so I think we must try and do it justice, which is "Do you think this pandemic has been managed better by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than it has by BorisJohnson in England?" So far none of the politicians want to answer that question. 0K. I honestly think it’s the wrong question. But it is THE question. That is the thing. Well, 0K. Right now we are faced with probably the biggest health crisis the world has ever had, and that’s applying across the world — all countries are facing a myriad of problems. I think in Scotland’s case, our biggest tragedy was the care homes. I think, generally, we undoubtedly, on the first wave, restarted too quickly, we tried to get going too quickly, and we now got a huge second wave. I think, frankly, with the students coming back in the way they did — I hate to say this — but I think that was a bad decision. I think that’s undoubtedly added. You think the universities should have stayed closed? The real question... Well, not closed, but done it all online. Perfectly feasible. The real question is what do we do now? How do we keep working at this problem and get past the second wave more successfully than the first wave? That’s what we should be concentrating on. We spend far too much time in Scotland and the UK arguing who’s right and who’s wrong. We are now at a stage, frankly, where we’ve got to make some clear decisions and try to get this next stage right. Mark, you wanted to come back in. Yes. I mean, what we have to do perhaps to get on top of this infection, and that involves tight social restrictions on movement, and only then will public health measures work effectively, but we’ve got to get them working, and as I say the real opportunity is to actually learn from what’s been done abroad rather than having I think rather fruitless internal competition about whether Scotland or England is doing better. They could both do better. Susan Young. Yeah, just picking up on a point that Douglas Ross made there, that he doesn’t feel that different parts of the UK have done anything particularly different in handling the pandemic, and yet that doesn’t equate to the very, very clear public opinion polls as to who indeed has handled it better between Nicola Sturgeon and Borisjohnson. So surely this absolutely comes down to communication from the two governments. Whereas obviously we have very clear communication daily from Nicola Sturgeon, and yet not from Borisjohnson. Is that, do you think, Douglas, what the difference in opinion polls as? in opinion polls is? Miriam. Yeah. I think you’ve hit the nail on the head there. I think what one of the clearest kind of distinctions between the two diverging approaches, and I think it’s important to recognise here, that actually we had a four nations approach beforehand which veered off path when BorisJohnson decided to, in my opinion, kind of pre—emptively ease lockdown, and we’ve since seen a four nations approach. said, I think on your point on messaging, that’s key — when polled, 80% of people in Scotland said the Scottish Government has good communication, and 72% of people in Scotland said that the UK Government has bad communication strategyjust now, so I think that gets to really one of the key distinctions there. More broadly, though, and Seema touched upon that a moment ago, I think one of the key issues that we need to address in terms of our handling of this crisis more broadly is the scale of outsourcing that we have seen throughout this entire pandemic. We are seeing consultants being brought in for a week who are being paid a year’s worth of nurses’ salaries. We are seeing Deloitte, Serco, McKinsey, being brought in — consultancy firms who are looking to maximise profit and who do not have expertise in public health — are being brought in to oversee how we respond to test, track and trace. Now, that, for me, is an abject failure. Why should the taxes of key workers who are trying so hard just now to help alleviate this crisis line the pockets of corporations who are not experts in public health? So for me what we need to do, if it is the case that we are recommended to have a circuit break, if it is the case that we are recommended to have another lockdown, we need to take a moment, step back, reassess our current approach and recognise that public health should be in public hands and use that as the mantra going forward to guide us. So, Douglas, what did you think when we saw today about private consultants getting up to seven grand a day in terms of helping the Government? Do you think that right? Is that where the money should be going? Well, I think we’ve also got to remember during this pandemic the private sector have been involved in terms of generating the ventilation capacity. Right at the start of the biggest concern in Scotland and across the UK was that we wouldn’t have that... But what about the point that Miriam’s making? So I think we’ve got to remember the private sector have worked with the public sector to ensure... Sure, but in terms of the point that Miriam’s making, consultants getting seven grand a day? Well, you know, I’m not going to defend levels like that, but we can’t just say that all of the private sector was wrong to get involved... I mean, obviously, your Government’s paying for it. Well, we’re paying for it, you know. As in the taxpayer’s paying for it. Susan, Lucas and Grant have all made the point, and I don’t think anyone on this panel from the respective parties and quite opposing party political views has been able to say anything that the Scottish Government have done differently from the UK Government. It has been a UK—wide approach, it is one... Well, I can. It is one that has largely been the same right across... Yeah, but different measures have been taken at different times. But I do agree with Susan. It does come down to communications, because Nicola Sturgeon... It’s not just communication. Sorry, Kate, if I canjust finish, Nicola Sturgeon is a very good communicator. She is on our television every day in Scotland doing the daily briefings, but when it comes down to the detail we still have, as you said, Fiona, the highest R rate anywhere in the United Kingdom, the highest percentage of deaths in care homes anywhere in the United Kingdom, one of the highest death rates per head of population in Europe. So there are clear challenges we’ve got to face, and as Sir Ian said, we got to learn from the mistakes we’ve made because we are seven months into this pandemic now and we are probably closer to where we were in March than we are at the end of this crisis. We’ve still got a lot to go through, we’ve still got a lot to learn from, and we cannot make the same mistakes in the next seven months... Absolutely. ..that have been made in the seven months before. The most important lesson... And that’s why, Kate, your government has to explain what happened to these people... The most important lesson to learn is moving quickly, well they might if we’ve learned anything from the beginning of the pandemic back in March, it’s that the more decisively you act, the quicker you act, the faster you can suppress the virus and get it under control. Now, Seema talked about... So why is the R rate so high in Scotland? Seema talked about the need for a circuit breaker. Now, she may be aware that we are currently in the midst of increased lockdown restrictions. Some of them are localised, but we have national restrictions right across Scotland right now, and the idea is working quickly and decisively with this two—week period to try and bring the numbers under control, and it’s not acting quickly that matters. But if, as you say, Kate — because it is a puzzle, and I’m not necessarily sure you’ll have the answer — but if, as you say, Nicola Sturgeon is acting quickly and her communication skills are good, why is the infection rate so high in Scotland? What’s going on? But you’re choosing one infection rate, you’re talking about the R number. What I’m talking about... Well, it’s pretty important. It’s important, but what we really look at at the moment is the rates per 100,000. That’s what matters. And in terms of across the UK, if you look at the figures rising, the Prime Minister announced his three—tier approach. I’m not sure that will go far enough in terms of suppressing the virus in the way that we need to. We are in the midst of a two—week increased lockdown right now. But the other difference — it’s notjust about communication, because this requires the public’s consent and it requires political leader clinic to treat the public like adults, ultimately we are depended on the public following the rules and regulations and understanding the evidence behind it, and that is the key to communication and that’s what I think distinguishes the First Minister from the Prime Minister. There’s quite a few hands up. Let’s hear from some of them. Toby? Thank you. I feel like as a young person it’s very easy for me to answer this question. Nicola Sturgeon wasn’t the one who had one of his chief advisers break the lockdown rules and then not even be effectively criticised. I mean, from that perspective, I feel like itjust sums up BorisJohnson’s whole approach to the whole pandemic. Kate? Hi. Yes. Douglas says that nobody can point to any difference. I think he’s missing the point, that this is about leadership. It’s not about numbers. Looking simply at numbers disregards that, that if you don’t have the people with you, regardless of how hard you lockdown, you’re not going to get people to comply — you’re going to actually get people starting to believe all kinds of conspiracy theories, and you’re going to end up with noncompliance. So this is about a difference in leadership, hearts and minds. It isn’t about a difference in R rates. Diane, you ask the question. What you think about what heard? Yeah, certainly I don’t think it was a competition and that wasn’t why I asked the question, but I do feel that Nicola Sturgeon has communicated very well. She hasn’t shied away from questions from the press and TV presenters, as Boris and his ministers have done, and I think she has made clear cut decisions that she has explained well and she’s earned the respect from the people, and, you know, she needs the people on board to follow what she wants them to do, and that’s precisely what she’s doing, rather than hiding away like Boris is doing. Well, I’m going to move on, if I may, because you had a good go, Douglas. There will be other things for you to say. Just on the quick action of the Scottish Government, if I can, just very quickly... Very briefly. It’s really important there is quick action, but also quick action for the businesses affected and Kate is Finance Secretary here in Scotland and they are waiting ten days now to get information... A far more generous package of support than the UK Government is providing. That matters. They were told to close at 51 hours’ notice and they had to wait ten days to find out they’re getting £40 million. We don’t know how that is going to be delivered, and that pales into insignificance. .. And we’ve got the end of the furlough... ..The £700 million that the Chancellor’s making available... ..costing Scottish jobs, in a few weeks’ time. Please, Kate, just use your speed and your urgency to get that money out to businesses, please. We are going to come onto business, OK, but before we do, because I want to get another question in — I want to mention that next week we are looking for people to join a virtual audience in Sedgefield, and a week after that in Lincoln, if you live in the area do, please, get in touch. Go to the Question Time website and you can fill in the form there. Do get involved. We love to hear from you. Be part of their virtual audience. Right, let’s come to our next question, which is from Martin Dundas... Thanks, Fiona. When is cafe a restaurant and a restaurant a bar? And does it differ in Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast or London? Well, thank you for that, Martin. I’m looking at the regulations. So let’s take cafe, for example. So you can sit down and eat in a cafe in Edinburgh, but only between 63m and 6pm. They close at 10pm in London and in Cardiff, and they’re shut altogether in Belfast. Mark, do you want to kick us off with this? Yes, sure. I mean the first thing to say is that this virus transmits in indoor spaces more easily than it does in the outside, and the second thing is that, going back to the last question, the reason the numbers are not going down is because we are on average making too many social contacts, and so we know that the lockdown works because when this pandemic started, with tight restrictions it did come under control. And restaurants, cafes, it depends how people are seated, how people behave, it depends whether they are inside or outside, and I think that when you read through, and I read through before coming on this all the different restrictions — I look at Northern Ireland, at Scotland, at Wales, I looked at England — it is very confusing and it is different. The bottom line is that we need to reduce our social contact, and until we get it down similar to the levels that we started with this is not going to come under control. And, frankly, we do need to get on top of the second wave, and urgency does matter, and so we’ve just got to get on with it, and I don’t think it’s helpful having lots of different hard to understand rules. As a scientist, just help us understand, does it make sense, then, scientifically, that the rules are different in these different areas? Well, I mean the first thing to say is that there is not a perfect science that says, you know, there isn’t a science that says what a restaurant is or a cafe, and nor is there a specific science that says six people or five people or seven people. What has to happen is that our social distancing has got to be maintained. And of course we all in this together. I mean, everyone has a responsibility here. But the rules have got to be clear, and I think the argument for a circuit breaker is that it is tough but it is relatively short. As we heard earlier, in a month’s time, if we can get the numbers down, then we’ve got to get testing and tracing on top of it rather than chasing behind. At the moment, although the numbers of available test has gone up dramatically, it still chasing demand, and we are only going to decrease the demand if we actually get on top of it, and then we can really focus on outbreak control, on testing in environments where the risk is higher, testing and the health system. That’s what we have to do. So your advice would be to shut them altogether, for a brief period, orfor a period, whatever the length? For a brief period of time, we’ve really got to get this under control. No question. Jim? Thanks, Fiona. Can the panel please explain to me, following on from Martin’s question, how the Government is going to expect employers in the hospitality sector, in pubs and wine bars, to be able to pay their employees’ wages when their businesses are closed and there is actually no money coming in? Itjust doesn’t add up. Graham, you had your hand up. Thank you, Fiona. Again, the level of difference here across the four nations, it’s adding to the confusion. Is it the case that, actually, it’s a role for some but not for me because I’lljust pretend I’m in Cardiff for the purposes of this meeting or the lunch that I’m having as well? I think it’s just too difficult for people to interpret the rules. It’s too easy for them to interpret it for themselves. So I think looking at the Sage advice and making the local lockdown nationwide has to be the way forward. Colin? Thanks, Fiona. I think there is a point being missed by a lot of the panel that Mark onlyjust mentioned at the end of his point, that the lockdowns are supposed to be a time to break the chain of infection and give time to bring up the testing and tracing system to a suitable level so that that takes over and brings down the level. Why are we not hearing enough about that? 0K. Miriam? I mean, this is a sort of two—part question from Martin, and obviously our audience has thrown in their ten—penneth as well. When is a cafe restaurant, a restaurant a bar? Because obviously that affects whether they can open or not. And also the fact that it is different in the four nations. Do you think it should be one message, as we’ve heard there? I mean just now... Well, firstly, there obviously has been confusion about what constitutes as a cafe and a bar, and we’ve seen that replicated elsewhere in the UK as well. We were hearing RobertJenrick in the UK Government cabinet saying that, because obviously if you’re going to eat food in a restaurant or in a cafe in the UK, in certain parts of the UK, or in the pub, rather, that they have to serve a substantial meal. He was asked, "Could it be a pastyT’, so it could be a pasty if it had a side salad, or if it had chips. I mean, if we are dealing with that level of complexity it’s very hard to navigate. Yeah, and I understand that. In terms of whether we would have nationwide in the sense of a UK wide lockdown the practicalities of that I think would be very difficult now for all four nations because we’ve all gone in different directions. I think what we need to do just now is listen to the public health advice and follow whatever it is we ask that the there. I think that’s first and foremost the issue. I think on the point on hospitality, there is a point being overlooked here as well. Which is that hospitality, and I say this is somebody who worked in the industry for a long time, is an area that is very, very insecure at the best of times for workers, and, you know, we have seen kind of a lot of zero—hour contracts, a lot of precarious employment in the hospitality sector already, and actually with this pandemic, as with so much of it, what it has served to do is not only create new vulnerabilities but expose fractures in our economy that already existed, The furlough scheme was mentioned there and I want to touch upon that. What we have a replacement for the furlough scheme is much better than the cliff edge that they were looking to do. It is still deeply inadequate. It only covers areas that are in lockdown and we are still asking people in many circumstances to make a significant cut to their wages. Are they getting cuts off their rent? cut off their bills, their food? No. What I would like to see is a roll—out of the initial furlough initiative that covers not only areas in lockdown but also other areas so that we can cover areas like the performing arts and the creative sector that actually are going to remain relatively closed for the foreseeable future. On the point, and this is my last point, on hospitality here, when we inherit out of this crisis we need to see a new deal for workers, because this has exposed vulnerabilities that existed for far too long in our economy. We need to ban zero—hour contracts, we need to root out precarious work, and we need a real living wage case that all workers throughout the UK. So... Sorry, I was just going to come to Douglas. If you want tojump in, Ian, sorry. Yeah. I’m going to begin the same point again. There is a huge, big challenge and problem out there and, frankly, we are talking about not unimportant issues, but not primary issues. I think the breakthrough appeared three—tiered approach. You know, clearly the country’s being affected in different ways, and it’s absolutely right that some parts of the country should be subjected to different rules and regulations than others, so the three—tier approach is a good approach, and definitely should the... ii It should be pursued, with great rare It should be pursued, with great care taken as to what the lockdown rare taken as to what the lockdown issues care taken as to what the lockdown issues are and how they might be applied. In terms of hospitality, I’ve got three sons, two of which are very heavily involved in pubs and restaurants and bars, so I clearly follow that quite carefully. One thing you must remember, there are a huge number of young people employed, and one of the biggest concerns I have is we are going to finish up with a lot of young people unemployed, so I really hope we can do something significant with hospitality and try and prevent what could be very significant unemployment in that area. Douglas, I mean, hearing what Miriam’s had to say and what Ian’s had to say, in terms of young people’s unemployment and the furlough falling off a cliff, do you think BorisJohnson should be doing more? So it’s not falling off a cliff, and I think that was actually Miriam’s point. What we have now, first of all, the furlough scheme... It’s significantly reduced in terms of the money people are going to get. But when it was introduced it has protected 9.6 millionjobs across the United Kingdom, £40 billion of taxpayer money has been invested protecting these jobs, {13.5 billion going to the self employed with about 5 million claims. This has been a significant, and one of the most generous schemes anywhere in the world. But then you’ve got Greater Manchester, the Mayor of Greater Manchester, in open revolt. I mean, surely this is not good for Borisjohnson, because clearly he wants to bring in some kind of extra restrictions there and he has a fight on his hands? Now, the replacement scheme is actually very similar, if you look at the levels of support that individuals and employers have in France, in Spain, in Germany, it is very similar to the two thirds that the government are paying in in the United Kingdom compared to other countries. But Ian is absolutely right, because young people are effectively the ones that could potentially be the most affected by this. First of all, their education, so many of them did not get to finish their school education, they did not get to sit exams, they went on to college and university in Scotland and in other parts of the United Kingdom, they had a terrible initial experience at university, and now they are going to be paying for this for much of their lives and the job market, economic emergency that we are all going to face is one that we have to try and treat extremely seriously, and I think it is really young people that we have got to be thinking about and that is why the UK Government have introduced the kick—start scheme and many other schemes to help young people into employment, but, again, as the Chancellor has said and the Prime Minister has said, it is going to be impossible to save every single job, but we are putting in place the tools to hopefully protect as many of them as possible, as we have done with the furlough scheme and the replacement scheme going forward. Seema Malhotra. Well, I was very surprised to hear that the Job Support Scheme was talked about by Douglas Ross there as being the same as the furlough scheme, almost the same, even though Louise Casey has come out saying that if you are going to say that you are going to pay two thirds of someone’s salary, you should also be saying that they are only going to be able to for two thirds of their rent or pay for two thirds of the food for their family. We have got a system that is currently, and decisions being made by the Prime Minister and the Chancellor, that are pushing people towards destitution, and the most important thing I think we need to do right now is to look at how we both deal with the health crisis that we are facing, as well as the economic crisis. TheJob Support Scheme, I have had many employers tell me, that it is not going to incentivise them to keep on employees, especially as times get tough again, and many in the aviation industry as well who are suffering from the slowdown and that is because, actually it is more expensive to keep people on part—time — to keep two people on part—time than it is to keep one person on full—time and rather than this, and they should be looking, the government should be looking at what is being done in Germany and elsewhere and what the Labour Party has been saying, to have a proper short hours scheme that supports people to stay in work and in theirjobs part—time, because the cost of long—term unemployment is much greater than what we are going to otherwise have to pay to keep people in theirjobs, in viable jobs, that will be there when we come through this next period and Ijust want to come back to this first question as well, when we were talking about how have we done under BorisJohnson versus Nicola Sturgeon, and let’s be clear, we have had some of the worst excess death rates in the world. Neither has done as well as they needed to, for our country, and nor have other countries have done, and now we are headed for the worst financial recession, economic recession, certainly in Europe, and I think we have to ask questions about what is going wrong, and we have to ask those questions honestly, the Government has to answer those questions honestly, and I think that is why it is important that they continue to work with the opposition, to listen to the opposition. We do need a four nation approach and we do need to take the job losses that are there now and could be coming, with a million facing a cliff edge at the end of October much more seriously than the government is doing now. Grant. Thanks, Fiona. If we are looking for money, why don’t we, here is a radical suggestion along the lines of Yanis Va roufakis this Yanis Varoufakis this week. The billions of pounds that they have been giving to management consultants, instead of giving it to them, why don’t we give it to local leaders like Andy Burnham, for his local Test and Trace regime, let us give it to hospitality workers, and entertainment workers who so desperately needed and been failed? Yvonne. Hi. Like many people, I am really surprised that when Rishi Sunak made this announcement back in March, to support, to put his arms around everybody and supporters, that this would suddenly stop, which feels like it is about to happen. Because, if we were at war, we would have a war chest and we would be continuing, you would not give up at the seven months or whatever and I feel like the Government has went into one gear and they have totally shifted into another one now, in the future is looking bleak now for lots of different people in lots of different sectors, different economies, in certain areas, in different parts of the country. Hummza. Hi, so to add to Seema’s point about thejob Support Scheme, Rishi Sunak also said that Universal Credit was there for those whose wages have dropped and he also proposed cuts to Universal Credit, so this is going to cause the 6 million households £1000 a year and the bottom fifth, they’re losing 7% of their disposable income. I think that this is terrible economics, because he has taken £6 billion out of the economy and that is of a £6 billion less cash being spent in a consumer—driven economy, so he is reducing incomes for the hassles that actually have to spend the money, but as usual, the poorer —— poor are are paying the cost of it. Kate, we have arranged quite far and wide in this particular debate and I am just going to bring you back to the original question, asked by Martin, when is a cafe a restaurant and a restaurant a bar? There has also been a lot of talk about that here in Scotland, as to what cafes can operate, given that restaurants are shut, apart from for takeaway. Does it differ in Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast or London? Do you think there should be one rule across the United Kingdom? So, no, for two reasons. I also think that we want to take a four nations approach as much as possible, so clarity of messaging is critically important when dealing with this virus. However, the simpler the message, often the harsher it is. So, if you look at Scotland for example, I represent the Highlands, which has a different rate of infection than some parts of the central belt. We have taken action to have stricter restrictions in some parts of the central belt than we do in the Highlands, because it does lead to greater compliance, people can understand what is going on and there is clearly higher rates there. Now, that will mean a slight variation in what those restrictions are. The second point, though, as to why we need different restrictions is because we are managing multiple harms. Now, I don’t have, in the Scottish Government, the fiscal levers — I’ve asked for them, multiple times — I don’t have the fiscal levers or the financial resources, because we are not allowed to borrow to properly compensate employers. Now, we are coming, as you said, to what is a cliff edge, because there is no way around it, the job Support Scheme is not a replacement for the furlough scheme, itjust incentivises employers, we know from our own analysis it is going to cost tens of thousands of Scottish jobs, which will be exacerbated right across the United Kingdom, and ultimately employers need support. AsJim said earlier, hospitality has been through the most challenging of times, businesses up and down the country have made enormous sacrifices, have invested, but right now, with less resources and the prospect of a cliff edge with furlough coming to an end, they are having to make very difficult choices and for me to the UK Government is that, if there are going to be these restrictions, if we manage the health harms as well as the Covid harms and with our primary objective right now of suppressing the virus, because actually suppressing the virus is the fastest way of getting back to some form of normality, economically or socially, if we can suppress the virus, then we can restart, but when it comes to financial support and Douglas mentioned a short while ago about business support in this break period that we have got, a two week period, one of the challenges was waiting for the Chancellor to make an announcement last Friday on what they were going to do in terms of additional financial support. That’s not fair, Kate. Because it’s one of our primary sources for the Scottish Government, a primary source of funding, that is the primary means by which we have to compensate and mitigate the effects. Now, we largely work together quite cooperatively, but I think it is ludicrous that just as we are seeing the rate of infection increase and the likelihood of restrictions, greater restrictions, we are seeing the end of what has been a lifeline and I accept, I have been open and honest, that it has been a lifeline for many businesses. Now is not the time to end it. Everybody can see it. ﬂ I have been open and honest in accepting it has been a lifeline to many businesses. Every business the length and breadth of the country can see it, but the Chancellor cannot appear to see it, no matter how many times it is put to him. But, Kate, infairness, you and the Labour Party welcomed, when the Chancellor announced the replacement furlough, you both welcomed it at the time and you said it was right that there was a replacement, there was no cliff edge, but say you were waiting for the Chancellor to outline any further support that you could give, the Chancellor has now said Scotland will get £700 million more. On Friday, and I was thankfulfor it. Why then today did Nicola Sturgeon announced that it would stilljust be £40 million going to the businesses affected? £40 million that will not be available... You do appreciate that that is for health? It is for health, not just for business support. Kate, it’s not! It is for the £3000 grants that the UK Government are giving to businesses in England that you could give to businesses in Scotland. They are waiting right now, they have had to wait ten days, sorry, cake, if I canjust finish, —— sorry, Kate, because this is really important to the businesses that are watching this, because I spoke to them on Monday, I had a virtual summit with businesses and they are crying out for help and crying out for help now, so give them that £700 million you got from the Chancellor or give them... Kate, Kate, give them some... It is based on an absurd position. Give them some of the £250 million that you haven’t spent through the Scottish growth fund. That is an inaccuracy. Why not spend that... Hang on, if you both talk at the same time, no one can hear. Let’s let Kate answer. There are two points I would make, one, small grants of one and a half thousand pounds is no replacement for the furlough scheme, that is point number one. Point number two is that that £700 million, worth asking the Chancellor, that does notjust cover business support, that is for health, that is for transport and a whole host of other things, just for clarity. The third point is that the business support that we have put in place is more generous than the UK Government support. It is. The facts are there. It is not. At the moment, and the rest of the UK, if you are obliged by law to close, you will get a grant and all the businesses in the supply chain will not get funding and other businesses that are not directly impacted will not get funding. In Scotland, we have provided funding for the businesses required to close by law, but also the businesses in the supply chain and the businesses which might see reduced trading, but are not required to close by law. I think that is the breadth of support that we need to see, but let us not kid ourselves, £1,500 of grant, important as it is, is no replacement for the furlough scheme. OK, I’m going to take another question, but before I I’m going to take another question now from Colin Campbell. Thank you, Fiona. A recent poll shows that the Scottish issue of independence has a huge majority of 58% support. How long can the UK Government continued to deny the Scottish people the right to have their say on the future? Now, Douglas, you have said before that London is in part responsible for the support for independence in Scotland. Do you want to expand on that? Well, just to answer the question, I don’t downplay the challenge that we face, people in Scotland like me, who believe in the Union, who believe in Scotland’s proud place as part of the four nations of the United Kingdom, but I also don’t believe there is anything inevitable about this, despite what the SNP representatives might say on this panel, because I think Scotland’s best days and proudest days are when we stand together as part of a union that we helped to build. But I also look at this from a very personal point of view, I have a wee 18—month—old son, Alistair, he is sound asleep in Murray right now back home, and I look at him and when I see these polls, I don’t get downhearted, I get even more determined than ever before, to ensure that when he grows up, he ran be as proud of Scotland, as part of it as me, but he can also grow up in the United Kingdom, rather than a divided Scotland. That is what I want. So, yeah, we have got to look at these polls, we take it seriously, but those of us who believe in the union, who will fight for the union, have to work harder and better than ever before, to promote what Scotland gets from the Union and what Scotland gives to the union. And how much responsibility do you think the Westminster government has to play in the support for the union here? I have said in my speech to party members... For independence, sorry, I said union, of course I meant independence. I knew where you are going, Fiona. I said to party members, you know, we need to do far more and all of us do, all of us who believe in the union have to work far harder to promote that case for what Scotland gets from the union. Have you spoken to the Prime Minister about it? Yes, yes, I have, I have spoken to the Prime Minister, I have spoken to MP5, I have spoken to previous MPs and previous prime ministers or not prime ministers, but politicians, from just, that voted for the established and since devolution was established in 1999, there has been a feeling, in London, by successive UK governments that only aids the nationalist cause. But for me there are so many things to be passionate about for the union, what we should be fighting for and that argument is as strong today as it was six years ago when we had our referendum in 2014. Miriam. Yes, I think the first point to make here is that the campaign for independence hasn’t actually started yet. I would argue that Westminster isjust making the campaign in and of itself, it is increasing appetite for independence, just by virtue of the actions it has taken and I am not surprised to see a growing appetite for independence, I think we have had a multitude of factors and I don’t think there is any one single factor that has increased the support for independence. I think there have been a multitude of things. You know, I think it is important to bear in mind where we were prior to this, we had faced a decade of austerity from a government we did not vote for, we saw a Brexit vote pushed through from another government we didn’t vote for,, backed by billionaire financiers and when Scotland voted Remain, it didn’t make an ounce of difference. Now, we see the pushing through of the Internal Market Bill, which I think, and you know, to quote Mark Drakeford, the Welsh First Minister, that this is an enormous power grab, we are seen a shoring up, a concentration of power is in Westminster, from devolved measures and that matters most now, because what that does it set the standards going forward for goods and services. Now, that is important, because we are heading into trade deals and I’d argue that it is not going to be the UK Government that are going to set the standards, it is probably going to be the US and whoever our future trade deals are with and frankly, we are going to see a race to the bottom and I think it is very imminently clear that areas like our NHS will be on the table. We have already seen concerns from farmers and we have already seen concerns from environmental campaigners and unions about what the prospects of that might be. Miriam, the UK Government have always been at pains to say the NHS will not be on the table. The UK Government also voted against, if I am correct in remembering here, voted against an amendment to the trade bill to protect the NHS against foreign interference, to protect wages, did you vote against that? It is absolutely categorical that the NHS is not up for sale in these trade deals. I would like to hear from the audience. You have delighted us long enough, Douglas. Kate McLaren. Thanks, Fiona. I am just wondering, having been through the previous independence referendum, and then the chaotic fallout of praxis, whether you voted Remain or Leave, when people will start to realise that referendums are not the right way to decide anything? Susan Lingen, I will come to a minute, first of all let me hear from Susan. I would like to know who’s requesting all opinion polls at the moment. The UK is currently facing an economic and a health crisis, of epic proportions, and surely constitutional questions are just a complete irrelevance at the moment? Can we just focus on what really matters right now, as one United Kingdom? Ian. I think we had referendum five years ago, it is an important question, we should absolutely not be addressing it again. What has gone completely wrong in the last two or three years is that we have got a Scottish Government who generally are adversarial and negative about a whole range of things that might happen with the UK and Scotland working together and that we should be at. We don’t have a devolved government that is just looking after Scotland at all, we are a devolved government who are focused on independence and what we need is a devolved government that will work with UK Government. You know, I have a list of six different things here which could happen, but right now are being held back because frankly the Scottish Government position is they don’t really want to get any big help from the UK Government, because somehow it will cut across the devolution rights. The structure and the system right now itjust isn’t working. If we could get that sorted out, and honestly get both governments working together on a whole range of quite exciting things that could be done, then we would be able to look ahead. We are not. With great respect, the SNP have one objective in mind and that is independence. Their actualjob is to look after the Scottish people and to get the best deal for the Scottish peopla and that is not the top priority right now. Kate. I fundamentally disagree with that and I had an answer I talked about the need to extend the furlough scheme and welcoming it when it was an announced, clearly I do have a very vested interest in ensuring that the UK Government delivered for Scotland, but actually on this, I agree with Douglas Ross in his maiden speech to the Conservative Party conference a few weeks ago, where he stated that his Conservative, and that I think is the bottom line and that is precisely why we are seeing an increase in the polls. Now, the polls arejust indicative of public opinion, but we had the ninth consecutive pole showing the majority of support for independence. Do you think the falling out that there has been between Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond has been helpful in that regard? Well, I think more people are interested right now in ensuring the businesses get support and that we suppress the virus and also making decisions about their long—term future, because they can see, certainly the polls prove this point, they can see that Scotland’s best interests are preserved by a Scottish Government. The question for me is what is the democratic route to delivering that? That is a question that I would pose to the Conservatives, because certainly it is unsustainable and undemocratic to keep saying no. We have got an increased, a consistent increase in the polls, we have got another poll yesterday saying that two thirds of people in Scotland think that there should be another referendum in the next five years. What about Susan’s point, with Brexit looming and what that may bring, and with being in the middle of a pandemic, that this is something that should be put on the back burner for now? And that is precisely why, right now, certainly from a Scottish Government perspective, every minute of my day is spent in dealing with the virus and dealing with economic fallout the virus. But clearly there are going to be questions, if you take one question like economic recovery, the last time we saw the UK Government borrowing to these levels was 2008, in the aftermath of the financial crash. Now that was followed... BY Bya By a decade of Astarte were the poorest in society paid for the failures and as we come out of this crisis, I failures and as we come out of this crisis, Iwant failures and as we come out of this crisis, I want to ensure that we are investing in people, we are investing in infrastructure and we investing in infrastmclure and we deal investing in infrastructure and we deal with our... our public finances in a fundamentally different way. That will require financial powers, fiscal powers to be in the hands of the Scottish Government, not... I’m just going to get to the rest of the panel because I am worried that we might then end because we may run out of time. Seema Malhotra, so the question is, how long can the UK Government continue to deny the Scottish people the right to have a say on their future? If Keir Starmer was Prime Minister, would he give them that right? Well, we have said that we will be going in to the next Scottish elections opposed to a referendum and opposed to independence and I think it comes back to the point that we are in the middle of a pandemic and itjust is very surprising to me that Kate talked about investment and she talked about the polling data, but I am surprised she did not mention, for example, the child poverty figures that are out today, which show that child poverty in Scotland is a 24% and rising and rising as well in Nicola Sturgeon’s own constituency and in Glasgow and I think that we are missing the point about what we should be really focused on. People’s health, jobs, the economy, education, children this year who have seen a disrupted education is not going to magically correct itself next year and, look, I just feel that the last thing people are going to want, is another divisive referendum, when there is such important issues to focus on... To rebuild our health system with our NHS still under strain, with... A lot more to come, our economy, withjobs possibly not back, as they... With education, retraining and older with education, retraining and older peopla... Losing theirjobs and catching up with younger people. I think that these are the really critical issues and that is why the Scottish Labour Party has been focusing on these issues and that is what they will want to be talking about, because this is where so much of the polling also shows that people’s priorities are across the United Kingdom and I will make this final point, people in my constituency, myself, many others, across the Kingdom have got friends and family in Scotland and we remember how divisive the last referendum was. Then we saw the Brexit referendum, with all the division that that brought. I think people want a period of healing, they want the country, the whole country to be working together and that is certainly were Keir Starmer is focused, because if he is Prime Minister, as I hope he will he, he wants to be Prime Minister of the whole of the United Kingdom and I think that that is how we will tackle these major issues, like child poverty, like aspiration and like prosperity to make sure that that reaches all parts of our nation. Thank you. Mark, you wanted to come in. Yes. My father, who will be 102 weeks’ time was born in Glasgow, my mother in London. My wife’s family came from Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Manchester and the south of England. I worked in health service where people came from all over the country and indeed, all of the world and the great science that has been done in the UK again, again, it’s very international, and I think my answer is obvious. I think it is. I think we know where you stand. There are a few hands up. We have got very little time left, we just want to get round afield of view, if we can. Lucas. So, I am coming from a place of growing up in England and coming to a Scottish university, I was originally very proud of the Union. But then seemingly all my Scottish friends that I have made here at uni are all pro independence. On the point made that it is important that we look for health, healing and ambition and prosperity, seemingly what most of my friends say is that the opportunities for Scotland outside of the United Kingdom, potentially being back in the European Union or making their own way as the UK and Britain have said, we are going to ourselves, those opportunities are so much greater than if we are stuck here in the United Kingdom and being consistently held back by Westminster, that continues to prioritise London over any other part of the UK. Tonight are questions came from Edinburgh, as we can see, and next week we will be joined by our audience in Sedgefield, alongside Nobel prize—winning economistjoseph stiglitz, so that should be quite a programme. The week after that, our audience comes from Lincoln, so do please get in touch if you are from either of those areas and you want to be on the programme. You can go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions there. Adrian Chiles and guests are on Question Time Extra Time on Five Live now. That is just about to start and you can see on the screen how to get in touch with them. Thank you very much to the panel for coming tonight. Mark and Seema, thank you very much for doing your part down the line, being part of the debate and, of course, to our audience, ourvirtualaudience, thank you to you and of course, thank you to you at home for watching. From Question Time, goodbye. APPLAUSE.