Welcome to Question Time. Tonight’s panel — Gillian Keegan, the Government’s Minister for Apprenticeships and Skills. A former apprentice herself, she left school at 16 to work in a car factory and pursued a business career for many years before becoming an MP in 2017. A Labour MP for 16 years, Culture Secretary, then Health Secretary under Gordon Brown, currently mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham. Dane Donna Kinnair, general secretary of the Royal College of London. A nurse who went on to specialise in child protection and ethical law, before taking up leadership roles in major hospital trusts in London, advising the government and other bodies. Joining us down the line, all the way from Athens, economist, author, politician and former finance minister of Greece, Yanis Va roufakis. And politician turned broadcaster, former Conservative MP and Defence Secretary, now living, we have to hope a more civilised life, travelling the world with a camera crew in tow, looking at trains. Michael Portillo. APPLAUSE Good evening. Welcome to my guests here in the studio and, of course, to Yanis Varoufakis, joining us down the line from Athens. Very good to have you with us. Our live audience is with us again, via video link, as we are doing it these days. Tonight, you are all in Coventry, or around Coventry. So very good to have you with us. Thank you for being part of the programme. And for all of you watching at home, do join the conversation. The usual way, on social media, @BBCQuestionTime. Let’s hear what you have to say. So, let’s take our first question tonight and that is from Jak Davies. With cases continuing to rapidly rise and areas now going back into full lockdowns, and venues closing their doors yet again, is a second national lockdown not a case of "if" anymore, but "when"? And what does this mean for a lot of businesses already struggling to survive? So, let’s talk about lockdown, or certainly greater restrictions. Andy? Well, we have been in lockdown for most of the summer. And, I have to say, people in Greater Manchester are really, really struggling. And we are just finding it hard now, with the way the Government is handling this. I’ve tried to work with the Government all the way through this crisis. But it does feel increasingly to people like they are being treated with contempt in the North of England, because last night a newspaper puts out a front page that says, pubs and restaurants are going to be shut on Monday across the North of England. Now, I didn’t know about that. They haven’t told me. It doesn’t really matter about me. What about the people who work in those pubs and those restaurants right across the North of England? And, you know, for me, this hasjust got to stop, to be honest. We cannot face a national crisis with the Governmentjust imposing decisions from the centre with no agreement with people who have to face the real world today, where people are saying, we can’t go in another lockdown, and our businesses will finish. This is the point I have made to ministers. On Monday, said to them, let’s have a reset movement around this new traffic light system, this tier system. I said I was prepared to go with it. But it must come with support. We’ve been under restrictions without support in the north of England, in Greater Manchester, Bolton saw pubs and restaurants shot and the staff in those places who work behind the bar and the kitchen had no local furlough scheme to help them. And the message I’ve given to the Government is a pretty clear one. You know, there can be no restrictions without support. And if it is going to be the Tier 3 restrictions, effectively a national lockdown, we have to go back to a full furlough scheme for those staff, support for those businesses. Otherwise, the North of England is going to be levelled down this winter. And I won’t accept it. I will not accept restrictions without support. the Government just imposing these decisions on us, briefing them to newspapers late at night. They need to treat the people of the north of England with more respect. And when you say you won’t accept it, what are you talking about? Civil disobedience? I won’t support it. So, earlier in the summer they asked for my support, and I did provide it. But if they come with restrictions, Fiona, without full support for the people and businesses affected, I won’t support it. But, actually, more than that, I will challenge it. I will use whatever means I can to challenge it, get support for people. Because, otherwise, they are going to suffer real hardship this winter. We are going to see businesses failing. I even threatened possible legal action over the A—level results in the summer because I wasn’t prepared to accept that either. Because that disadvantages young people in the North of England. We need a change here. I’ve offered to work with them time and time again. But I think that the mood in the north of England this week, speaking to local leaders, business leaders, is the Government has lost the dressing room and they need to work very hard now to get it back. Gillian? Well, I think what Andy hasn’t said, actually, which is that we are facing an unbelievably serious situation. And if you just cut that into context, less than two months ago we were quarantining holiday—makers coming back from various countries around the world because they had more than 20 cases per 100,000 in those places. Today, in Manchester, I believe it is way over 500 cases per 100,000. It is extremely serious. It is a very, very difficult balance that we have to make. But it’s extremely serious. Two thirds of the hospitalisations that has happened of all covert patients in the whole of the UK has happened in the north—east, the North West and Yorkshire. ——Covid patients. Two thirds of everybody going into hospital in the country, in those places. This is serious. It is getting out of control. And we have to do something to bring it back under control. Now, of course, there’s been some local lockdown restrictions. Moving to single households, obviously the curfew of 10pm has been there for everybody. The rule of six, across the country. But the cases are still rising. So, we do need, we definitely need to work locally and we definitely need to make sure that the communications are much clearer. And I do agree with you, Andy. I think it’s probably very frustrating for everybody if leaks are made or there’s speculation in the press. And I don’t know which of these it is. But clearly we have to do something if we are going to bring those cases back under control. We have one thing we need to do, which is to try to get that R rate back to below 1. What about support for businesses, for example? Well, of course we have done unprecedented support for businesses. The furlough scheme... But from here on in? The furlough scheme is still existing, it is still in place until the end of this month. And then we have the winter economic package, which is introduced from the 1st of November, which is for restrictions, and restricted times. The Chancellor has looked at some industries as well, there have been specific sector deals, specific sector support. We have said that we will support businesses. We have supported businesses. There’s been grants, there’s been VAT cuts, there’s been business rate cuts, there’s been... You closed pubs and restaurants in Bolton overnight, just a few weeks ago. The people who work behind the bar in those places or in the kitchen got no support at all. Do you think that is right? Well, the people would be entitled to furlough. Well, they weren’t. Why were they not? Because it was closed overnight. Theirjobs were just taken away from them overnight. Well, their employers could have put them on to furlough. That’s exactly what that scheme is there for. It is there... You know, everything was closed overnight on the 23rd of March. Everything was closed overnight. You know, look at the skies, you won’t see hardly any planes flying. Go on a train, there will be hardly... Well, Michael could tell us, but there will hardly be anyone on the train. Honestly, Gillian, people working behind bars cannot be put easily into a furlough scheme. Well, they were put into furlough schemes. The point that you’re missing... All across the country, for that six months, they were. We have been under restrictions, local restrictions, without support. And that’s happened all summer. If you’re going to introduce a traffic light scheme, that will trap large parts of the north of England under severe restrictions this winter, can I ask you, do you think we need a proper support scheme so that we don’t see major loss ofjobs, major business failure? Would you commit to that tonight? Because if you will, I will work with your government to then put that in place. What we were presented with was restrictions without support, and that is not acceptable to us. For some reason, Andy, you seem to not have realised that the furlough scheme that we put in place in March, which is still in place today, which we have spent £40 billion on... But Gillian, as I am sure you know, it is closed to new entrants. Yes, but it’s closed off at the end of this month. But it’s been there... It’s closed to new entrants. The Bolton staff could not access that scheme. It closed on the 30th ofJune. And the point is, furlough ends on the end of this month. Yes, and we have... In industries like aviation, for instance, can’t come back. So the damage you’re going to do to those people who work in regional airports, combined with the local restrictions, means that fragile economies in the North are going to be... Can I just correct you? It’s the damage that the coronavirus, the global pandemic is doing. The Government has been there to help as many people as we can every step of the way. It is not the Government that are doing this, it is the coronavirus, it’s the public health epidemic we are dealing with. The Government are choosing to close bars and restaurants, that’s your choice. Jak, you asked the question, you had your hand up again? Public health is an issue. Yeah, in terms of a national lockdown, if it is necessary, then it is necessary. But I think the thing I fear about it, I work in the hospitality industry, is, with the furlough, that does come to an end at the end of the month. And come the 1st of November, the scheme that’s in place isn’t going to be able to pay my bills for me to be able to live, coming into winter, when it’s colder, you need to use heating more, and nobody blames the Government for coronavirus, obviously. It’s completely out of your hands. But when it comes to people living, I fear that we are going to lose a lot of team, from where I work. We are not going to be able to afford to live. And it’s such last minute. As you said, with the north, it was overnight. Being able to close a business and tell your team they cannot work, and you don’t know what’s going to happen with their pay, overnight, it’s worrying. It’s really worrying. Jasper? Yeah, I’d just like to say that we’ve got to remember, behind all the big numbers of people, those injobs, that will suffer from mental health, financial burdens, pressures on families, it’s huge. And because it’s unprecedented, why can’t we take unprecedented action? Why can’t we just say take all the politics out of this, because it always feels like a bit of a slanging match, why can’t you just sort of say, you know what, have a uniform government and take massive, big actions. Because, really, it needs to have more of a humanitarian approach to this, rather than a political approach. Take the politics out, put the people first. You know, if someone said to me, yourjob’s gone the next day, I wouldn’t know what to do. Paul, I’m going to use your surname, because we’ve got three Pauls in our virtual audience. Paul Somerfield? Yeah, good evening. There is no doubt about it, Andy, I certainly appreciate and understand where you’re coming from. But I certainly agree with what Jasper said. We really must unite and stop Boris bashing, there’s been no other Prime Minister who has governed during such horrendous times in our peacetime. Now is the time of the United Kingdom to all unite, get behind him and stick to the rules and the regulations. Because there is no quick fix. It’s not going to be easy. There are going to be hardships. I stress, we must all unite. Can Ijust reassure you, I said to the Government this week, let’s reset things, bring national and local government back together, let’s agree these traffic lights, get the support right as well, and just two days later, the front page of the times, bars to shut across northern England. That explains my mood this evening. Nobody has taken any decision lightly, Andy. Nobody. And obviously the scientific advisers are there, reading data every day. This is a serious situation. It’s very serious and to having an impact on peoples health, and is very worrying. I must come to the rest of the panel as well. Yanis, you are coming to us from Athens tonight. Jak’s question is, is a second national lockdown not a case of "if" any more, but "when", and what about businesses struggling to survive. Greece has had a pretty good coronavirus experience, relatively. Yes, in a sense we have been watching with a look of glee on our collective face, as the result of the fact that, for the first time in many years, we are not the butt of the European joke. You know, there is the United Kingdom doing worse than us. But, besidesjoking, Greece has done much better than the United Kingdom for three reasons. First, because the Balkan Peninsula has, happily for us, being outside the thoroughfare of trajectory of Covid—19. We are not as promiscuous in terms of being a hub of finance, of tourism, like Britain is. So, that has sheltered us. Also, the government, remember, I was saying this as a leader of an opposition party, government, nevertheless, was quick to respond, unlike Borisjohnson. They wasted a fantastic opportunity, however, to plan for phase two. So, now, they’ve lost control of phase two. What’s striking about this conversation is that it’s very similar to the one we are having in this neck of the woods. Michael Portillo. Jak’s first question was is there going to be another lockdown. I think the answer to that is no, it’s not going to be the same as before. For example, I think the government is absolutely determined not to close schools, and I think it’ll want to keep a lot of businesses open. I think this time it’ll look much more carefully what is the relationship between new cases and hospitalisations, people on ventilators, the number of deaths, and I think there will be a different approach to risk. The other thing, though, that I think has to change, and I very much sympathised with Andy on this, is that the government has to take more voices into consideration before it makes decisions. On the one hand, that means Parliament, so it isn’t good enough to make decisions and then retrospectively to ask Parliament’s opinion. And I think the government would be very well advised to consult more with local authorities. Indeed, I’d go much further, I think the government should give many of the responsibilities to the local authorities and for local authorities to take the actions which they deem to be appropriate. And what difference do you think that’ll make? I think it would make a difference certainly to the political conversation. I mean people like Andy would be singing a different tune if that were the case. I personally think it is more likely that public health officials at the regional, city and local level understand the situation better than officials who are central but there is also a political point, which is that the questions about this disease are very difficult to answer. You know, what is the objective now? Is the objective to reduce the number of deaths? To reduce the number of deaths to zero? Is it to stop the NHS being overwhelmed? Is it to strike a balance? Are we now interested in group immunity? These questions are terribly difficult to answer and I think instead of the government having to answer all of these questions, mayors should have to answer these questions as well. So, by all means, let Andy do something different in Manchester from what is equivalent its doing in Liverpool and somebody else is doing in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Let others have regional diversity. There is also, by the way, another reason why I think this might be of benefit to the government, which is it would reduce its Scottish political problem because at the moment you have BorisJohnson on the one hand, Nicola Sturgeon, who is perceived as doing very much better. If you had a variety of regional voices, so, Andy doing his policies, the Mayor of Liverpool doing his policies, you’d reduce... So, it’s spreading the blame, that’s what you’re talking about. Well, spreading the blame? Spreading the responsibility. Let me go back to my previous point. If you have a debate in Parliament, the funny thing that happens is that people pop up with all sorts of common—sense questions. You know, how does this work? Will it apply to this person, will it apply to that person? Funnily enough, through Parliamentary debates, because members of Parliament talk to their constituents, who are members of the public, you get common—sense points of view which are brought forward before legislation is drafted rather than afterwards. And if they come up afterwards, then the government has to explain them away rather than improve the legislation. 50, Donna, Jak’s question is a second national lockdown not a case of if any more but when. You are at the front line of all this. What’s your view and is it something you’d welcome? It is a worry because we are seeing cases rise. But, actually, the answer to that, Jak, depends on how we behave. We’ve already been through coronavirus, we’ve been at the height of the pandemic. We know what to do if we want to suppress this virus, we know what actions we need to take. And, yes, of course, we are talking about to different things, they are irreconcilable. One is how are we going to maintain the economy, keep ourjobs, the other one is about how are we going to keep ourselves well, healthy and save lives. And we have to remember that this virus causes untold problems for some of our population. It is not for all of our population but for some of our population. And, you know, I take the panel back to unless you’ve got health, you’ve got no economy. The dead don’t pay taxes. 50, actually, there is something that is a first—order and something that mayjust be second—order. So Ijust like... Having been a nurse that’s fought through this, I think it’s important to recognise that, yes, there are other things, like the economy, keeping thejobs going, but dead people can’t work. So, for me, it’s hugely important that we actually protect the populations that are vulnerable. And the other thing... Does that mean you want tighter restrictions? I want people to practise the restrictions that are out there. So, you think people are not obeying them at the moment, in sufficient numbers? I spoke to about 100 nurses today and I spoke to others in West Yorkshire, and, you know, example after example of people that were not following the restrictions, actually, and for those nurses, it was quite heartfelt because they’d been on the front line, they’d done their bit, they’d stepped up, they’d worked more hours, they left their children and moved out of their homes. And, so, it’s quite important, actually, that we don’t lose sight of the fact that the behaviours we adopt can help save lives and may be if it’s not my life or somebody else’s life, it could be their own lives. So let’s not lose sight of the fact we are in a pandemic, and we do have to protect lives, and, yes, of course we need to protect the economy but, actually, if you haven’t got life, you can’t protect the economy. I’m going to take another question, but, before I do, wejust wanted to mention where we will be in the coming weeks. We are looking for people to join our virtual audience as we have here tonight. Next week we are in Edinburgh. The week after that, we are in Sedgefield, Tony Blair’s old constituency. One of the red wall seats that turned blue at the last election. So, if you live in either of those two areas or thereabouts, around there, get in touch by going to the Question Time website, you can follow the instructions there, and come and be part of our virtual audience, we’d love to hear from you. Let’s hear from one of our virtual audience now, who is here with us. Karl Timson. Hi, Fiona. I’d like to say given the disruption Covid—19 has had on the public, and the mixed messages and confusion between parties, what measures are the government taking in planning ahead for the future? And thinking if we have a vaccine or if we don’t have a vaccine, Karl? Yes, yes, planning ahead if we don’t have a vaccine, what if we don’t find the vaccine in time before the end of the year, what is the government’s plan? So, what is the strategy? We all know a lot of work’s being done on the vaccine, the government supporting it, you don’t need to tell us that, but what is the strategy? Well, we have... The overall strategy, and Michael mentioned this, is to try and get the R rate below one, so that’s what were trying to do, that’s what were trying to do in suppressing the cases. So, Donna’s point is absolutely very warmly welcome, and actually from the front line, from the nurses saying, please, please follow the rules because, actually, the best things we can do, we know a bit more about this disease now but transmission, it is very easily transmitted but we can do an awful lot to stop that. Really, this hands, face, space, it isn’t a rhyme, it’s really serious. In terms of what we’re doing to prepare... To better prepare, the thing we’re trying to work on is obviously the vaccine, and we have the two groups here that seem to be leading the way, but, as you say, that’ll be binary, it will or won’t work at some point. In terms of testing, we’ve got another two streams. The first is to have a lot more testing, so, 500,000 tests per day by the end of this month, and the moonshot, which is millions a day in the early next year. And that really reliess on the pilots we are doing now with the rapid testing, the saliva testing. There is a number of different pilots going on. That, if you can get to those kinds of tests, it does give you some options... So, the strategy, then, is either for a vaccine to come to the rescue or to have so much testing in fact that we don’t have to go into restrictions one after another? To live with it in a way you can use testing effectively so, for example, for venues you could use a test, you could have a rapid turnaround, you could tell if somebody was negative, they could go into the venue. Can I just ask you about... We are working on those in parallel... Let me just ask you about the vaccine because there were reports this week that on a vaccine does come along, if and when it comes along, it’ll only be offered to 15% of the population. Is that right? I don’t know where those reports came from. Obviously, we will get as much of the vaccine as we can, and we’ve secured already... So, is that right or not right? I don’t know if that is right or not right but we will go until we get the whole population... This was the head of the vaccine programme saying that which is why I am asking. I guess they’d know. I suppose they would know, I suppose that’s where they will start. If you start with a vaccine, I imagine you’ll go to as many people who want a vaccine. It’s not like the vaccine is going to be sort of depleted and then there is no longer any vaccine. It can be made again. So, you know, Ithink the question, actually, is not about the percentage, it’s about how long it takes to get enough of the population vaccinated and also the prioritisation of the vaccination, which I’m sure will include some of the more vulnerable groups that don are referred to would be top of the list. Donna, where do you think the government should be going? BorisJohnson has talked about having a bumper six months ahead, none of us really know what’s going to happen around Christmas and beyond. I think if a vaccine comes along, all well and good. But, actually, there is something about us living with the new normal because, actually, whatever happens now, we can see that we will suppress and then we will spike. If you look at the trajectory today, we’ve seen is that we all took really restrictive action, and the minute we started loosening, we started to get some spikes. So, I think we are going to have to get used to a new norm. We are going to have to do the things that we are doing, like the face, the masks, the hand washing, the social distancing. I think, for us as a people, it is a new thing we have to get used to. Clearly, at some point, we are going to have to go back to work and earn, and have pubs, but, actually, as we learn more and more about the virus, it’s been around... It is relatively young, really, so I think time will teach us a bit more. Michael, I mean, as Donna says, people will have to go back to work, lots of people are not going to be able to go back to work at the moment. Part of the government’s strategies clearly economy and. .. Government debt has passed £2 trillion for the first time in history. That’s going to surely going to be a large part of the strategy, going forward. Well, as I said, Ifeel sure we’re not going back to total lockdown. What was quite effective in controlling the virus was total lockdown but if I’m right and we’re not going back to that, and partial lockdown seems to be relatively ineffective, what that implies is we’re going to live with levels of the virus. What we know is the viruses much more lethal for certain age groups and certain sorts of people, and much less lethal for others. So, I think there will eventually emerge a difference of policy towards people of different age groups and different vulnerabilities which will mean that younger people will be encouraged to go back to work, and older people will be protected. And the protection of the older people will be partly, I think, in the hands of individuals, so if you’re going to visit your elderly parents, you want to make sure you’ve been tested, maybe you’ve been quarantined for some days before you go to see your parents, and, at some levels, it’ll be institutional. So, where, for example, young and old meet is in care homes, well, young people who go into work in care homes you have a social life outside they’re going to have to be tested, I’d say, on a daily basis. We’ve absolutely got to make sure we maintain that frontier. So I think, although I don’t believe this has been talked about very much, we will see the emergence of a strategy which looks very different from the strategy we come from. On your point about the 2 trillion, at no point as the government or, dare I say, any government anywhere in the world tried to calculate what it is worth spending. We shied away from the question of what human life is worth. It’s too dangerous a subject. Of course, we do do this in other contexts. If you’re going to build a bypass, we say how many lives is going to save and is it worth doing. But, in this context, we haven’t. I’m pretty sure that the money we’ve spent, the ruin that’s been brought, the mental health issues that have arisen, the cancellation of the cancer operations, the number of people who have developed other diseases, the mortality of those people who haven’t been treated, I’m pretty sure that all of that is not worth the lives we may have saved but no one is willing to calculate that but I think at some point, unless the vaccine comes along, we will have to have a different approach in which we say this thing is going to be around, and we will therefore have to think about who is able to live with it and who must be excluded from it, and how do we protect the barriers between these two populations. And, Yanis, sitting where you are in Athens, what’s your take? Well, let me first answer Karl’s question about what governments can actually do. The main task is a proper test and trace regime system. Unfortunately, BorisJohnson and our Prime Minister here during the lockdown made the far—fetched promises about world beating superlative testing and tracing systems and they didn’t deliver. And that eroded trust in our governance. At a time when lives depend on the maintenance of that trust. It’s notjust a question of money. Greece is broke. Our government... As you know are hugely indebted, and they couldn’t put an amount of money into the testing regime the United Kingdom did. But the shambles in the United Kingdom with the testing regime proves that it’s notjust a question of penny pinching. It’s a question of where you spend the money. And this obsession with subcontracting to private medical megafirms, the testing system, which... Is called an "NHS" testing and tracing system, but it’s not. It does not involve the NHS. All the expertise of the NHS is not part and parcel of this system. Therefore, you have complete failure, as one company subcontracts to another. That’s the answer to Karl. On the question of the economy, allow me to say that I was watching your Chancellor over the last months, and I thought he had a pretty good pandemic until recently. Then he made this derisory speech in which, to please a crowd of Tories, he talked about how you need to balance the books, and to end furlough at the end of October, as you all know better than me, to replace it with a feeble job support scheme. Now, this is not simply going to create huge uncertainty in the mind of the most precarious, the young, the indebted, those people who are using credit cards to put food on the table before the pandemic. But it is also an act of vandalism on the United Kingdom’s public finances. Because, Fiona, and this is how I end, however hard he shrinks public expenditure, during a period of serious depression, the tax take of the Government is going to be collapsing faster. And he will not be able to decrease his spending at a rate that will catch up with the decrease in his revenues, without destroying the Boris Johnson government. David, you’ve got your hand up? I think the future strategy for the Government should not look at the symptoms, which is what they are looking at at the moment, but the actual diagnosis of the problem. And I was pleased to see that there was an announcement, I think, by the Government that they are going to spend several thousand pounds which the local councils are going to have to employ marshals and police to really focus on the true diagnosis, which is what is the cause of this problem? The cause of this problem is that people are just not... Some people are just not adhering to the government guidelines. The only way this virus goes from one person to another is by somebody being within two metres of each other. And I think that is what the Government should focus its efforts on, quite frankly. And making people obey the restrictions, is what you’re saying? Yes, you see these people gallivanting around, they might be in a minority, but the only way the numbers are increasing is because they are just not following what the Government is dictating. And that is use the mask, keep two metres apart from each other and wash your hands regularly. And if people did that, this virus just would not grow and we would be out of the problem. And if it continues to grow like this, then the Government has got to spend money, as a future strategy, to employ these people, marshals or whatever they are, to refocus on the areas where these people are breaking the law. Well, as you are talking, David, lots of hands going up. Ben? I think it is easy to talk about what the Government’s future strategy is going to be. What have they lost the trust of the public too much? I suppose that is not just the Conservatives, look across party over the last ten days, Jeremy Corbyn has hosted a party at his house with ten people, the SNP MP who got the train, infected, all the way back to Scotland. The SNP MP you are talking about, Margaret Ferrier? Yes, I just think that, regardless of what the future strategy is, is the trust gone? I say SNP MP, she has lost the whip, so she is not an SNP MP technically speaking. Laura? Hi. Yeah, just on that point before, I think it’s very difficult, obviously, for us to protect what is going to happen. But to blame the people when the Government strategy was obviously to open bars and restaurants, and then to automatically shut them down so quickly, when we know that, as Donna mentioned, it’s going to spike and then it’s going to reduce again. I think it’s more about, has the Government learned about this latest wave, or the beginning of this wave, if we are, and what do the panel think about how that has immediately been handled 7 We are seeing a rise in spike in cases, I suppose. Just listening in to what everybody’s been saying, I think one of the recurring themes for me is around the communication of whatever anybody is going to do. The issue remains how the information is communicated to the public, and how people react. And that’s where we are seeing the problems. Because information has been trickle down to local authorities, and two newspapers, and people aren’t able to react effectively. And that’s when we are getting these mixed messages and people behaving differently. Because people are hearing at absorbing information for what it means to them. And I just think that is something we all need to work together on. I should clarify, Jeremy Corbyn was attending a wake, incidentally, not hosting a party. There were more than six people there, but it wasn’t actually a party at his home. Andy, you were Health Secretary once. Karl’s question is about what measures can the public expect Government to take, in particular if a vaccine is not ready. Would you do? So, as Gillian said at the start, it is a serious situation. It is hard. I was Health Secretary when we had swine flu. I didn’t get everything right. So, I would acknowledge all of those things. Fariah made an excellent point, that there are too many mixed messages. We’re under local restrictions on the north—west, to stop gatherings in the home. I would say this 10pm curfew creates gatherings in the home, because it puts everybody out of the pub at the same time coming to the supermarket, and then on to a gathering. So, they’ve got to decide, what are they trying to do? At the evidence behind it, I think as Fariah said, and then more will maybe buy in to what they are doing. To answer the question what would I do, I think Michael and Yanis have got this right. The Government strategy, I’m afraid, has been to centralise and to privatise, when it should have been to localise. And if they’d done that at the start, I think they would have been able to have a much better sharing of responsibility. There are public health teams and local authorities that have been bypassed when it comes to testing and contact tracing. And just to say, it’s not too late. We could still change things. The national Test and Trace system, the NHS Test and Trace system, which Yanis rightly said isn’t much of an NHS system, currently it reaches three quarters of people who test positive in Greater Manchester. It doesn’t reach a quarter. And it reaches half of their family and friends, half of their contacts. Now, that is not good enough, going into winter, for us. And why is it not performing better? It’s the difference between a call centre, disconnected from communities, or people on the ground going doorstep to doorstep. When local teams do it in Greater Manchester, there is a much, much higher success rate. And that is what I would do to answer the question. I would switch resources from these national contracts, I would put it, as Michael said, into local authorities. I’ve asked Greater Manchester Police, Greater Manchester Fire, to help with contact tracing. To show that we are putting forward solutions, we are notjust criticising. That is what the government should do. I am happy to take responsibility and be held accountable for improving those contact rates that we have currently got. So, we need to fix Test and Trace before we go into the winter. But Yanis is right, too. We need to extend furlough for those sectors that will be able to come back anytime soon, like aviation, like hospitality, like live events. That is what we should do. Because then we will get more buy in to the Government strategy, people would feel supported and we could get through a difficult winter. If they don’t do those things, I think we are looking at a winter of deep discontent in the North of England. Let’s hearfrom Paul O’Donnell. Yeah, just sort of going off that, I think it sort of is about that two—way conversation, and the conversation is not just government outwards to those localised centres, it is also to ensure that people like you, Andy, can have conversations back and conform their decisions and make those decisions. And you have a specific question, Paul? Yes, I have. A lot of musicians and artists took offence at Rishi Sunak’s comments this week. As Coventry prepares for being UK City of Culture in 2021, what are the Government going to do to ensure that independent artists survive that long? So, for those of you who are not aware about the comments you are referring to, Paul, Rishi Sunak was on another channel, he was asked what the Government would do for people in the arts, specifically, who can’t work. He talked generally about newjob schemes and said they are a fresh and new opportunity for people. Today, the Chancellor denied he meant that people in the arts should retrain. In fact, he said, they don’t need to retrain. I mean, Yanis, does it come back to providing greater furlough schemes, greater opportunities for people? Particularly in the arts, music and theatre sector? It’s funny you should ask that, because we had recently a debate in Parliament, in Greece, about precisely this issue. And it was our party’s position that we have to have a special furlough for people who are in the arts, and have been hit twice by the fact that the theatres, pubs and music venues have closed down, while their second job, or main job, in the service sector has already been hit. I think Michael Portillo might appreciate that in Parliament I paraphrase slightly Winston Churchill, saying, ill fares the people who fail to salute the arts with the reverence and delight which are their due. Allow me just to make a point regarding generally supporting those that deserve support at the moment. You know, the Bank of England is printing mountain ranges of money. Which it hopes to lend to the City of London banks, hopefully so that they pass it onto business, hoping that the business will not buy back their own shares, but they will, you know, invest in good qualityjobs. This chain is not working. Imagine if the Bank of England did that which the monetary authorities of Hong Kong did at the beginning of lockdown, or what Australia did in 2009. This is something where I believe a lefty like myself and a Thatcherite can agree. Because it is an original idea by Thomas Paine on one hand, and Milton Friedman on the other. Imagine if the Bank of England, instead of passing the money onto the commercial banks, were to put it in the bank account of every citizen of the United Kingdom. A certain amount of money, until all boats are lifted up, including the artists. Michael Portillo, could you agree with that? Well... Yanis is saying you are both in agreement on that? No, I don’t dismiss it out of hand. I mean, we’re all talking about how we are going to support people, and we want to support people, partly so that they can feed themselves, but partly so they can spend money on the economy, which providesjobs for the people. So I don’t dismiss it entirely of hand. I think the other approach I would have to the arts, the Government very often asks the question what can we do, the answer comes back, we’ve got to close the theatres. See, if I was a minister, I think I would say no, I want to know how I would keep the theatres open. What would we have to do for the theatres to be open. Actually, having the theatres open, it seems to be an easier question, actually, than opening restaurants, in the sense that you can sit in a theatre, covered up. So, whatever the appropriate covering is. When you go into a restaurant, you have to have the covering off, because you’ve got to eat. When you go into a theatre, you don’t have to. But at the moment, you have to have fewer people in the theatre, which makes it a very expensive production, relative to when you get relative to when you get money from people buy tickets. First of all, I don’t know whether that’s true. I don’t know whether if people were appropriately clothed, whether they could go to the theatre and not maintain social distancing. In any case, I would want the theatres... I wouldn’t say the theatres had to be closed. I would say the theatres should be open. The maximum number of people, and if it has to be relayed to another theatre, where there is another group of people. In other words, what we need to do is to find ways of making things happen, not just accept that everything has to be closed down. We had the same in transport, you know? We were told that only 10% of people travel, by comparison with earlier, on transport. That’s not a good enough answer. The question is, how do you get 100% of people back on transport? What is it that we need to do, scientifically, with people in power or whatever, to get back to where we were? Laura, you had your hand up? Hi, yeah, just on this point as well, I happen to live in Stratford—upon—Avon. Obviously the announcement of the RSC closing two of its theatres until 2022, thatjust has a massive knock—on on the local economy as well. So, we need to find a way to support the arts in order for these businesses to continue to thrive. So, it was just really around that, a comment around that, really. Amy? Hello. A lot of people turn to the arts when lockdown happened. And Ifeel like they’ve kind of been forgotten about. White background you think they should get more support? Yeah, definitely. Steve 7 50, further to Donna’s comments about it being a new norm, why don’t we consider a new economic policy, and universal income? That would benefit all, notjust those in the arts, but raising everybody up, and perhaps kick—starting the economy that way? And, Paul O’Donnell, you asked this question. Forgive me, I should know this but do you work in the arts? Yes, so I am a theatre maker. I tour up and down the country, and internationally when I get a chance. So how has all this affected you, have you had any work, are you benefiting from any of the money the government has had to offer? I was lucky enough to get the self—employed income support but I understand that the theatre industry, the sector, hasn’t been so fortunate in that. 70% of the industry are freelancers and I think only about 30% of them in theatre were eligible for that support so there is a lot of people in the industry who haven’t had any income for seven months. And now we’ve got to this point in the crossroads, when the self employed income support is ending and it feels to the industry very much like government is sort of approaching it with the deal with that approach, and telling us there isn’t going to be any further support the industry. And, importantly, for the artists that are working with it, and I mean artists as in designers, technicians... ..anybody that works around the theatre, they’ve all been affected by this. So, Gillian, Rishi Sunak was very keen to make it clear today that he explicitly was not suggesting that people who work in the arts should retrain. But if they can’t work, what are they supposed to do? It is important to say what Rishi was saying because, actually... Well, I’m just quoting what he said today. He said specifically he was very clear, these are his words, that he doesn’t, he’s not saying these people should retrain. So, given that, how does he expect to get by? We had Nicola Benedetti yesterday, the violinist, she had people out in Parliament. Of course, the arts are important, everybody loves the arts, they are a massive export, they are a massive differentiator for our country. And they are hugely important. That’s why there has been a package of £1.57 billion on top of the furlough self employment schemes, etc. Nobody is saying at all, and the Chancellor hasn’t said that there is no support for anything forever. He’s basically said he keeps everything under review, we know that. But I want to say something that I think we’ve lost the focus on. This has not been an even economic disruption with the coronavirus. More than half of our economy is actually growing massively. So, if you’re in health, if you’re in food, if you’re in IT... Hang on, you are way off the question! Hang on a minute, Paul’s question is what are the government... It is important to answer the question. What are the government going to do to ensure that independent artists survive that long, as Coventry, because we’ve got our audience from Coventry, prepare for UK city of culture in 2021? So, what is the government going to do to ensure that people like Paul and others do survive that long if they are not... Clearly, the Chancellor doesn’t want them to retrain, what do you think they should do? £1.57 billion has gone into rescuing the arts... That’s to organisations, not to individual artists. They haven’t worked out yet how it’s all going to go through, so it is going through a number of different routes. I don’t know, they are organising themselves how that happens, I don’t know any more detail on that. There is many sectors who haven’t had that support. The arts has had that support plus the other schemes are there. Of course, we are not going to sit here and let all of our arts or all of our culture, everything, disappear so we’ve got nothing left. We are there to support which is why that has been put in place. And I know the Culture Secretary is talking about sports... There is many, many sectors, you could apply this question to many sectors. What I was wanting to say, and I think is important, is the first six weeks of apprenticeships and skills minister, every meeting I had was about massive skill shortages in this economy. Hundreds of thousands of skill shortages in nursing, mental health, social care, engineering... So, do you think they should retrain, then? There is many opportunities for people to retrain. I’m not saying, because this is where people say I don’t want to retrain. It isn’t forcing people to retrain. It’s just saying if you are a young person or if you are looking for your second career, this is my second career because I’ve been in business for 30 years, if you’re looking for something different to do, there are many opportunities. We’ve got many skill shortages. And that’s why we’ve put a big announcement togetherfor adult skills, to help people to retrain, to make it much more easy. Some people want a second career. They’ve been working for a long time now and it can be right. I’ve met many people who have been made redundant in the past to use this to retrain, to go into nursing, for example, that they wanted to do from school but never got the opportunity. So, it is an important message. Donna, you’re not looking too chuffed with that. The government is saying it’s going to get 50,000 more nurses, maybe this is how? I’d be delighted! I’m not looking unhappy, I’d be delighted. As I said, first of all, nursing, you have to want to be a nurse. And it is a lot of hard work to be a nurse. We are 50... We started this pandemic 50,000 nurses short, and we are 50,000 nurses short because nurses is treated as a vocation, it’s not been paid properly, we’ve stepped up, we’ve served. So there’s going to have to be much more thanjust saying retrain because, actually, people want a good quality of life. And that includes paying people properly and recognising their skills and value. What do you think of government suggestions that we’ve heard about people who work in cinemas, for example, or cabin crew, could retrain and work in the care sector, is it a goer? It might be, if you can acquire the skills and education, and you’ve got the ability to be a nurse or a carer, I think... I’m not going to say it isn’t a goer, because there is a shortage of nurses, we know that. However, it is still a complex skill. You’ve seen how we’ve battled on the front line, and we are about. We did a survey recently, 37% said they wanted to leave the profession. 50, actually, isn’t as easy as retraining to be a nurse. It is actually quite a hardcore career with 37% said we’ve been through the pandemic, we’ve seen enough death, thanks, we want to be off. Gillian is right. The government have put a lot of support in different ways. Of course they have. But to answer Paul’s question why are people in the arts still kind of speaking out, I think there’s two reasons why. The first is many people who work in the arts are self—employed or freelancers and the truth is the Chancellor never gave those people enough support. They were missed out back in April. There was a support scheme for the self employed. There was but it didn’t reach anybody. People who were newly self—employed didn’t get support, they missed out low—paid company directors was another group. So it never was the case that everybody got support. Some people were missed many of them work in the arts. The second reason I think people like Paul are feeling frustrated this week is it’s as if the government are making a judgment about somejobs are viable and some jobs are not viable. And they are always putting the arts into the not viable category and encouraging people to retrain. There is no doubt at all in my mind that if the support is put in now to keep people going, the arts will come roaring back at the end of this, as will other sectors as well, who simply cannot function properly at this moment in time. And I think that’s what people are getting frustrated about, as though the arts ran just be sort of left to go. Because, for us, the arts are the lifeblood of Manchester. The city thrives on the institutions we’ve got. And I put this to people — if we come through this, and to come through this crisis and we look up and the theatres have closed, and our music venues have closed, and everything else we love has gone, then Covid will have won, basically. Let me take a very quick question in the time we have left from Jenny. Hi. My question is will Donald Trump get the sympathy vote? After of course he has contracted coronavirus, is what you’re referring to, jenny. It’s been interesting to watch from over here, from over this side of the Atlantic. Michael? The immediate reaction in the poll seems to have been adverse for Donald Trump which I must say is slightly surprising. I have a feeling, reading the American public as best I can, that there will be a bit of a resurgence in Trump support and that there will be a little bit of a closing of the gap with Biden. I think a big mistake has been made today allowing Trump effectively to pull out of the next debate because they changed the rules. They were going to make it virtual. However, at this stage, it looks as though the gap between Trump and Biden is too great to cover in the remaining days before the election. So I’d expect a closer result than the polls are suggesting at the moment but probably none the less 3 Biden victory. Gillian, Donald Trump described his contracting coronavirus as a blessing, as a gift from God. Was it a gift from God for BorisJohnson? I certainly don’t think he’d describe it like that. In fact, I don’t think he has described it like that! You know, there is a serious point, actually, that there is a lot of people living with long Covid which can affect anyone at any age, and we don’t talk about that nearly enough. So anybody who thinks that, you know, letting the cases rip and carrying on is a good idea... So do you think Donald Trump was wrong to say that, then? Do you think he has behaved irresponsibly? Imean... Come on, Gillian, say what you think! Donald Trump, I mean... As for the election, I think most people have decided. It’s so polarised, it’s an unbelievably polarised society and I think will he get the sympathy vote? I very much doubt it but, do I think he’s been blessed and God has given him the answer? Not necessarily, no. He is lucky to have survived it without... It seems to be very low symptom, so, for that, he will be thankful but it doesn’t mean his case is going to be the same for everybody else’s case, which is kind of what he might be saying, if you take this drug, everybody, it’s nothing to worry about. That is completely wrong. You think is wrong to say that? I think it is wrong because Donna will tell you, she knows much more than I do but Long Cove it does exist, it affects people in different ways, different age groups as well, and it is very debilitating. How do you think he’s handled it? My advice to Donald Trump would be to isolate and follow the rules... For a long time! Isolate, follow the rules, and I’m not sure Donald Trump would be anybody I’d be listening to pronouncing on Covid. Well, right, you heard it here! Andy? I think that is brilliant advice! If he could isolate beyond November, whatever the election date is, that would be even better but to answerJenny’s question, how can you have sympathy for somebody who is still infectious, but drags security staff on a drive around for his own purposes? How could you have sympathy for someone who does that? for somebody who’s made a virtue of not wearing a mask all year, holding rallies without social distancing? Somebody said rightly before that politicians need to lead by example through this and through their actions do the right thing. That’s what the job brings with it, that’s what you should do. And he’s done the complete opposite and he put his own health at risk but he actually has put the health of millions of Americans at risk through this. So, I’ll make it plain, I’ve no sympathy for him whatsoever. Ijust hope and I think the world would be a better place if he is removed with a landslide next month. I think we will begin to get better politics around the world. We’ve had to pandemics, haven’t we? This year, Covid we have talked about. But we’ve had a pandemic growing over the last decade of xenophobia, nationalism, discrimination, hate, and we’ve seen that come to a head this year on the streets of Minneapolis. This world, in my view, it needs a big correction. We need to come out of this with a very different mindset. And Ijust think, you know, it starts, I hope, with the removal of Donald Trump next month. Yanis, do you think he will get the sympathy vote? I agree with Andy that it is impossible to sympathise with somebody like Donald Trump but where I disagree is with the premise of the question, if I may. Donald Trump doesn’t do sympathy. He doesn’t follow the politics of sympathy. He doesn’t trade on sympathy. He doesn’t want sympathy. He trades on envy, on discontent, on anger, which he manipulates magnificently, as we have seen. You saw what he’s like. He hasn’t asked for his supporters sympathy, he asked for their envy! Look at how great I am! I even managed to defeat Covid with the help of medicine! And I will give you the stuff for free. This is where we are. Where we have been since 2016, perhaps a bit earlier than that. We have created circumstances of austerity for the many, and socialism for the financiers. That created discontent at an industrial scale and people like Trump, Bolsanaro, Mohdi, Le Pen, Salvini, Orban and so on trade on this. They don’t want our sympathy. What we need to do, we must change the circumstances that beget the energy that feeds them. 0K, we are I’m afraid out of time. I can see a few of you have your hands up. A few are applauding as well. If you were actually here, we’d be able to hear but thank you very much for that. Tonight our questions came from Coventry, as we saw. Next week, as I said earlier, we will be in Edinburgh with the Scottish Government finance secretary, Kate Frobes, and the new leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Doug Ross. The following week, we are in Sedgefield, where Nobel prize—winning economist Joseph Stiglitz will be giving us his take on what’s going on. And you can apply to be in our virtual audience, go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions there. Adrian Chiles, as always, is coming up on 5 Live with his guests on Question Time Extra Time, and you can see on screen how to get in touch with that. But, for now, just say thank you very much to the panel for coming here tonight. Yanis, thank you very much forjoining us from Athens. And, of course, all our audience in Coventry, thank you for being part of this programme, really appreciate you being able to do that. Of course, you at home for watching. Thank you very much from Question Time, bye—bye.