 Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Steve Barclay, former Brexit Secretary under Theresa May, currently the Government’s Chief Secretary to the Treasury. Labour’s shadow Minister for Domestic Abuse and Safeguarding. She ran for leader of the party before stepping aside and is known for her outspoken campaigns from the back benches, Jess Phillips. Theo Paphitis, entrepreneur and owner of companies such as Rymans and Robert Dyas, he started his first company at the age of 23 and went on to become a familiar face on the BBC’s Dragons’ Den. Iona Bain, writer and broadcaster and founder of Young Money, a website dedicated to young people’s finances. And spoken—word artist, writer and social commentator, rapper and social commentator, George Mpanga, better known as George the Poet. Good evening, welcome to my panel here in the studio, welcome toJess and Iona, who are joining us down the line and, of course, to our audience, thank you very much, our virtual audience, you are all under 30 this evening. Lucky you. And thank you very much forjoining us and thank you for watching at home. If you want to join the conversation, you can, in the usual way on social media, @bbcquestiontime. So, our first question tonight is from Suresh Bindra. I welcome the easing of lockdown, so people can move on with their lives. Life is all about risks and, having been under the complete control of the state since March 23rd, is it not time to allow people, who are aware of the risks now, to make decisions about how they want to approach this situation, given we live in a free, liberal society? Theo. Wow, control of the state, that’s one way of putting it. I think they were trying to keep us safe. I don’t think anyone wants to be kept locked up, but the reality was, if we hadn’t had the lockdown, many of us wouldn’t be here today, especially oldies like me. So I think we’ve had to endure that and we have to come out of this sooner rather than later, I totally agree, because otherwise we’re going to have a lot of unintended consequences, and that’s things that will be a lot worse than possibly, you know, some minor outbreaks of the actual virus. So it’s important that we come out now, it’s important that we adopt the new normal, because it is a new normal. We will never be back to normal until we get one of two things. A vaccine or a successful treatment. When we’ve got those two things, we can get back to normal. Until then, we will be under control, one way or another and we’d better stick to it, otherwise we’ll be on total lockdown. You say stick to it. Jess Phillips, the rules are pretty complex now and, of course, they are different in different parts of the UK and what Suresh is saying, is it not time to allow people to make decisions about how they want to approach this situation? Look, I mean that that’s ultimately what we want for everybody. We want everybody to feel free and be able to go around and do how they would have done prior to lockdown, but, I mean, where I live, lots and lots of people have died and, all over the country, that is the case. In areas like the one I represent, which has large proportions of poorer communities and BAME communities, we’ve seen terrible rates of deaths and, so, as Theo said, these controls were to try and keep us safe, but it is very confusing for people, and so I think that, fundamentally, now, people are going to startjust doing what they think is right, because it seems there is a changing landscape with the communication that we are hearing. I’ve had people this week, pregnant women, saying to me, 'I am in my third trimester, ran I go out?" Older people who were shielding saying, "Well, what are the rules for me?" And I think it needs much clearer communication and, also, an understanding that this isn’t to control. This wasn’t to try... The Government, I could criticise them on a lot of things, I don’t think they are out there to try and control our minds or our liberty. The reality is that we need to be able to trust the Government in what they say and listen when they speak and believe that it is based on our welfare and, at the moment, Ifeel that the communication is a bit confusing. Steve, making decisions, allowing people to make decisions about how they want to approach a situation, is that what we’ve seen in Bournemouth today, where a major incident was declared because so many people descended on to Bournemouth and onto the beach? Well, obviously, what we’re seeing in Bournemouth is very disappointing today but, as Theo says, the lockdown only works with the consent of the people. We have to trust the vast majority of people complied with the lockdown because they saw the advice from the Chief Medical Officer, the advice from the Chief Scientific Officer. They saw what was happening in other countries, where health systems were overwhelmed, and recognised we needed to protect the NHS and take the lockdown, as Theo says, to save lives. That is the measures that were taken but it is a balance, as the questioner says, as to the concerns over is the lockdown too much or others, like jess, feel was it insufficient? So there is an argument here but we have to trust the common—sense of the British public, we can’t legislate for every single scenario. And the vast majority, yes, there’s been an issue in Bournemouth today but the vast majority... And there was also a rave in Brixton last night, in south London. There will always be exceptions but the vast majority of the British public have exercised common sense, have worked to protect the NHS, have made huge sacrifices but it is right now that we restart the economy, because there is consequences to that as well. Do you think it was inevitable, in some way, that we would see a scene like we did at Bournemouth today? When you have the Prime Minister just two days ago, when he was asked by 3 Brighton MP about how seaside towns should respond to a potential influx of people, such as we have seen, he said, "I’ll be calling on local representatives to show some guts "and champion their communities as venues to return to and support." Do you think that is helpful, given what we’ve seen today? All we said was people need to exercise common sense, observe two metres where they can, but there are circumstances, and I’m sure we will come unto them, from a business perspective, where there are pressures which are impacting people’s lives, on theirjobs, people losing theirjobs, their livelihoods, that also has health consequences as well, both from a macrolevel in terms of the ability of the state to pay for things like our NHS, but also in terms of pressures such on mental health. So there is a balance to be struck. I think on the whole, the British public have responded extremely well in observing the lockdown, but it’s right now that we restart the economy. Kirsty? Hi. So, as someone actually from the shielding category, I’ve got kidney failure, so I’ve been pretty much in isolation for three months. The idea of releasing, just completely sort of releasing lockdown, just terrifies me, to be honest. In Brighton today, already, the beaches were incredibly crowded and Ifeel like if we reduce lockdown any more, things like that are going to happen more. We had tonnes of people coming down to Brighton and I can’t do anything. I don’t look ill, so when I am out and about and I’m just starting to go out into society, people don’t know I’m ill, and so people... Yeah, my health is reliant on other people’s actions and that’s quite scary, because I feel very out of control of my own situation. Kofi, you had your hand up. Yes, in a similar vein to that, I also live with a vulnerable person who happens, like myself, to be BAME and we’ve seen a lot covered on the news about how the BAME community and people of colour are very vulnerable to the virus. And when we look at the countries who have lifted the lockdown, we have seen there have been some spikes in the virus. Now, obviously, the Government, they are dealing with two priorities. One is to protect lives and the other is to protect the economy. So I’m just wondering, if we are doing both, what sort of plan is the Government going to come up with to make sure that two and two don’t sort of come together here? And that we are also ensuring that those who are particularly vulnerable and those in the BAME community will be protected while lifting these restrictions? And, Suresh, you asked the question. Yes, thank you for letting me respond. I completely agree with what Theo said. I do think that the lockdown being implemented when it was implemented was the correct time, but I think now, the indirect effect of the lockdown, no one can quantify those. You can’t quantify the massive impact on children’s mental health. They’ve been away from education for six months. People are missing cancer appointments. Cancer is a potent disease. So I think the lockdown should be eased as quickly as possible in a safe way and people are now aware of the risks, so they can choose to accept those and I think the economy does need to get moving as well as other issues too, so I do welcome the lockdown being eased slowly. 50, George, Suresh’s question was is it time to allow people start 50, George, Suresh’s question was is it time to allow people to make their own decisions about how they approach this pandemic? Thanks for the question, Suresh. Well, I think people making their own decisions is contingent on them having reliable information and, unfortunately, I don’t get that from this government. I don’t feel like we are having consistent, clear messaging. When the lockdown was initially imposed, it was very unclear, the details of that lockdown. As these measures have been eased, we’ve been told to factor in the R number or the... We make arbitrary decisions about what is appropriate behaviour, where most of us can’t really figure out what even the threshold for achieving what the Government was describing as herd immunity was once describing as herd immunity would be. So I take Steve’s point about the British public not being stupid, but we really need clear and consistent messaging. Iona? Well, I think that Suresh has quite rightly brought up the concerns about the economy, but also about people’s mental and physical health during this time and, obviously, lockdown across the whole country is not sustainable and therefore we have to find a way, as Theo has said, of living with the virus and having some distance from the virus and making sure we can do that safely, until we find a vaccine or an effective treatment. And I also completely understand Kirsty and Kofi’s concerns about coming back into society if they don’t feel that it is absolutely 100% safe yet to be back out there, and these are the two competing concerns that we are having to consider right now, and there are no easy choices to make. But when we look at what happened in Bournemouth today, I think we need to appeal to people’s sense of responsibility and I think most people have complied remarkably well with the lockdown, especially young people. I think this next generation coming through have really divide this through have really defied this snowflake stereotype that’s been applied to them too many times and have actually shown themselves to be very compassionate, very responsible and very stoic and I’m sure we can appeal to their sense of responsibility and say, look, try and have some good judgment of bad situations. good judgment about situations. Like going to the beach, if you think it’s too crowded, try and stay away because it would be so devastating for us to have to go back into a second lockdown, both financially and for our health. Lots of you have got your hands up in our virtual audience. Hannah. Thank you. I think what Suresh said about people accepting the risk is not the full story. You accept the risk for yourself, by breaking lockdown, by wishing lockdown was over sooner, but you don’t accept the risk for people like key workers, who don’t have a choice, they have to leave the house. For example, my dad was 55, he was a key worker and he passed away from coronavirus. Hannah, I’m so sorry to hear that. Thank you. When you say people can make their own choice and accept the risk, you also accept the risk for the people that you will infect. And of course, that is the different thing about this pandemic, is that it is not necessarilyjust the risk you take on yourself, it is how you affect other people as well. Emma? Yes, reallyjust to echo what Hannah just said. My family are all pretty much NHS workers so although you might be taking a risk yourself, if you got ill, you end up in hospital, it is putting people like that at risk as well. George also mentioned about having clear messaging and people using that to make decisions. Well, the daily briefings are gone. I’m in Scotland, we are quite lucky where we are, we still have some visibility of what is going on but in England, as far as I’m aware, it’s almost like it is back to business as usual. Daniel. Ijust wanted to make a comment about the lockdown. So, I live with both my parents, who are in an at—risk vulnerable category, so I’ve been in lockdown for overfour months now because, instead of following what the Government advice was, I decided it was probably safer for us to lockdown earlier, because if you look at when we lockdown, compared with nearly every other country in Europe, including Germany, we came out later, so I just want to ask the Government if they think they advice has either if they think their advice has either been clear or sensible? Because the number of people I know that have died from the virus, it is over ten now, so I don’t feel like I’ve been able to put my full faith in the Government in looking after my parents. Gosh, ten people, Daniel. You know ten people who have died from the virus. I’ve got one friend, his uncle and his father died within a one—month period. I’m so, so sorry to that. I mean, Steve, it is interesting, isn’t it? We have a panel here of people under 30 and you are not all necessarily saying the same thing, but it’s interesting how many of you are saying, caution, you know, let’s not rush into this, people are vulnerable. You yourselves perhaps are vulnerable because you have underlying illnesses or you live with people who have them, and you had George and a number of people there talking about they don’t feel they are getting clear messaging. Well, you hearfrom the personal loss and the tragedy of that why the lockdown was necessary, to get the infection down, which it has done, to protect the NHS, to ensure we met the five test that we set... But what about what they are saying about the messaging not being clear? Just to answer George, his question when he was saying the lockdown wasn’t clear enough, the opposite. If you look at the stay at for example. The Sage advice was up to 20% of children continuing going to school, it actually dropped to fewer than 2%, so actually, the lockdown was highly effective. The question is, how do you then balance, and again, one of the comments was we are now lifting it in its entirety. We are not, it is in a staged way, so there are still many areas, like theatres, like gyms, who may come onto it. Areas where people say we are not lifting the lockdown quickly enough because they want to get to work, they are worried about their livelihood, so it’s a balance, and the messaging was very clear... And do you think it’s clear now? ..that has enabled us to get the infection rate down in the way that we have. So, just on that point, let me just clarify what I was trying to say. It is not that the idea of lockdown wasn’t clear when it was established, it is that, first of all, the leader of your government missed five COBRA meetings... That is not how COBRA works. 0K, fine, advice from top scientists was ignored for a while, as the point was made from the panel, we were the last of the rich countries, definitely, to enact a lockdown in our geographic neighbourhood and there has been reports from very credible people in the medical community that say if action was taken even two weeks later, there would be a significant dent in the number of dead from Covid—related deaths, even as late as April, I think the Government was denying that there was a significant risk to care facilities and, by mid—May, 40% of Covid—related deaths had come from care homes. So I think it would go a long way if your government began to show a little bit of contrition and acknowledgement of the mistakes that have been made in the handling of this crisis up to this point, as opposed to the nit picking at the point arguing we have seen on Twitter, very strangely, from this government in particular. Jess. I agree with lots of that and part of the problem with the communication that I certainly have found as a constituency MP, let alone a citizen with children out of school, is that the Government would stand in front of us and say things like, "We’ve put a protective ring around care homes." And I felt at times like I was going mad, because I was talking to my care homes and hearing the reality on the ground and, you know, I think the idea that we need complete honesty and complete trust... And it is hard to trust politicians at the best of times, I get that, but, at the moment, we need real trust and honesty in our politics, because that is the only way that any consent of either the lifting of lockdown or that if we have to go back into it, or as we had seen when we had to go into it, it is going to work... So a bit confused. It has felt sometimes like there was one rule for one and one rule for another, in that very, very famous ffH-Ill-YIF We are just asking for honesty, I think, as citizens and certainly as the opposition,. I want the Government to do well but I do have to feel that I can trust that they are telling the truth. OK, let’s take another question now, from Iman Anwar. Hi. With youth unemployment on the rise, and worries over further negative impacts on our economy and recovery — and as a recent graduate as of December 2019 — what assurances do I have, as a young person entering the professional world of work, that there is enough opportunity available for me? And what is your situation, Iman? Sol had a job offer in the advertising industry, which is what I graduated in, but it was revoked because of lockdown and, you know, they said that because of their financials for the rest of the year and the worry around coronavirus, they weren’t really sure if they could keep my new employment, so I’m just a little bit concerned about if there is enough... You know, young people already don’t have enough opportunity as it is in the professional space, so I’m just worried about what plan the Government has to sort of bring that opportunity up for us. So you had a job, which has now gone. Are you working at all at the moment? Yes, I am currently working on food supply, it was my part—time job at university and, luckily, I didn’t hand in my notice, so I can still, luckily, I can still work there. So a supermarket, or something like that? Yes. Right, and just out of interest, hands up in our audience, how many of you are out of work or have been furloughed? Right, 0K. What is going to happen to young people, Steve? Boris Johnson talked about they should all have apprenticeships. A lot of people seem to have been taken by surprise by that. Is that going to happen? Well, the key challenge before us is jobs and if you look at what happened going into the pandemic, we had halved the rate of unemployment in the young, but the young tend to be the first to feel the impacts of a recession, which is why, if you look at the figures now for the 18—245, they are 10% of the working age population but 18% of welfare claimants, so they tend to feel it hardest first and are often in the sectors of hospitality, tourism, where the impacts are greater. So the strategy has been, first, to protect as manyjobs as possible. That’s why we’ve had the furlough scheme, which has protected over 9 million jobs, at a significant cost, over £22 billion. The self—employment scheme, which has protected, again, around 2.5 million jobs at a cost of 7.5 billion. We supported 850,000 businesses through the grant scheme, investing, again, £10 billion into that. So there’s been very significant measures, alongside all the things we’ve done on cash flow to support businesses as well. And what about these apprenticeships? Now, moving forward, you are right, you then go from that protect phase onto the next phase, which is how do we restart the economy? What are the jobs that we can then move to from those areas of the economy where jobs are being lost? So greening the economy, looking at the challenge as a first major economy to set a test of net zero by 2050... But, very specifically, what about, BorisJohnson has pledged apprenticeships for young people. When might that happen? We are absolutely committed to that. So the Chancellor will give a statement inJuly, which will be all about the next phase, talking about how we green the economy, how we respond with infrastructure projects, because jobs and jobs particularly for young people is one of the key challenges before us and that is very much what we are focused on within the Treasury at the moment. Iona. Well, if I could justjump in here, because I think Steven is absolutely correct to say that young people’s jobs right now need to be right at the top of the priority list, because we know that young people are the most likely to have been furloughed, who have had their wages and hours cut as a result of this crisis and to have lost theirjobs altogether, and they are also the most likely to be working in the industries that have been hardest hit by lockdown, like retail, tourism and hospitality. And there are predictions that there could be youth unemployment rising by 600,000 this year because people who are leaving education this year are coming into a really tough jobs market, the toughest we have ever seen and so we need really specific measures. And I have to say, listening to Steven there, I’m surprised he didn’t mention more about apprenticeships and the apprenticeship levy and the fact that it has not been a success since it was introduced in 2017. It was meant to get more young people, particularly from disadvantaged backgrounds, into apprenticeships to give them better life chances. What we see is participation rates among those from more disadvantaged backgrounds has fallen by a third. The apprenticeships have gone more to those from privileged backgrounds and we see within the rules that, actually, the apprenticeship levy can be used to send managers on courses to get MBAs. I don’t think that is what the apprenticeship levy was meant for. It is meant to help young people find their feet in the world of work. So it’s not necessarily about spending more money, although there could be a case for more targeted funding, it’s about spending the money well and making sure it’s actually going to young people in the labour market. Katie, you have got your hand up. Hi, I work in hospitality, so I’m currently furloughed and have been since the middle of March. I’m lucky, as in I’m 26, so I’ve done hospitality for quite some number of years, so I’ve already got experience behind me, so somebody is more likely to keep me on, rather than somebody who is 17, 18 and it’s their part—time job while they are studying. Ikind of... I don’t necessarily disagree with Iman, I can see the point that he’s making but I also think that, for a while, university degrees have been advertised as the way to go and, like, I studied music at university. I know people that have studied maths and things like that. I think younger people don’t necessarily have the opportunity to go into something like a trade, which is probably more valuable. I do think there’s a community of people who want to be influences and YouTubers and things like that. I’m not saying that everyone, obviously everyone is different, but I do feel like that is where people would probably find more work, if they were interested in more like a trade rather than being an influencer. Niamh. Hi, yeah. Ithink... I dread to think what it’s going to be like. I graduated last September and I’ve been in between waiting to start my masters and saving money for that and it was already next to impossible for me to find a job this year, so with the pandemic and with Brexit, I dread to think what it’s going to be like for those graduating this year. For me, thejobs that I did find were minimum wage, they didn’t cover your living expenses, you had to top that up with benefits. There are unpaid internships, completely unpaid, nothing is paid. They are given disproportionately to privileged people. I know Steven Barclay reeled off all of these stats about young people and where they were, about hospitality, so that really worries me, you know these things, but there wasn’t a pandemic before, so young people were suddenly on your radar? Kirsty. So I wasjust wondering, this is kind of may be aimed at Steve, because I feel like, particularly, it’s been raised by the pandemic, there’s more opportunities for people to work online and with everything going on at the moment, I feel like self—employment should actually be encouraged and I don’t feel like the Conservative government are actually really encouraging people and particularly younger people, there are plenty of opportunities. I get off my back and do a lot of things and I feel like we should be encouraging self—employment and small businesses a lot more. Steve, I’ll come back to you. Theo, if we are going to talk about self—employment, obviously you were an entrepreneur from the get go, but hearing from Niamh there, there’s a whole swathe of people who are thinking what are myjob prospects going to be? If we are facing possibly the worst recession since the Second World War, if not further back than that, it looks pretty bleak. Fiona, I couldn’t put it better myself. It’s going to be tough. Unemployment’s going to rise, thejob market’s going to be incredibly difficult. Youngsters are going to face a tsunami ofjob losses and this is one of the few times I’m going to say this, because I’ve always believed in a very free economy and non—discrimination, but we need to start looking at some very positive discrimination, where we can actually address the issues of people of a certain age, with support to employers to make sure we encourage that. I think we really need to understand that... You mean encourage young people in and older people out? No, not at all. That would be bad news. My firstjob... So I left school at 16, very little qualifications, dyslexic, sent out 100 applications, I got 100 rejections. Mind you, my applications wouldn’t have been good reading with my spelling. But, actually, the only reason I got a job, my firstjob was because at that time, the Government were giving allowances to businesses, I think it was about 1,500 quid a year, it wasn’t a lot of money, but to take on somebody of a certain age who hadn’t had a job before. So they took me on when they were really not sure that they should actually be spending £1500 but the fact was it was subsidised, and that gave me my firstjob in my first opportunity. And then I could move on from there. So we need initiatives like that. Because the measures that the Chancellor has put in were required, but it was a blunt instrument, blunderbuss approach that had to be done very quickly and I’m afraid some people went through the net. Now we need to focus a lot more and deal with category by category, industry by industry, age by age, requirement by requirement. It’s hard work and you can’tjust make... No disrespect to our politicians, Steven, but the fact is the present government do like to make big announcements for PR purposes and we just need to do the graft and the work first and actually accept that, sometimes, it’s going to be difficult and, sometimes, you are going to say things that are not popular but you just want to be respected, not liked all the time and we must stop those wanting to he liked by the public. Let’s get honest with them, tell them how it’s going to be and then actually address difficult issues that are going to be difficult, but if you sure you are working at it, people work with you. George? I express support for much of what Theo just said and much of what the panel has said. I do think self—employment, entrepreneurship, is going to be necessary moving forward as so much of our industry transforms. We are dealing with a new society. We go through it every time. We see someone, we think we are going to shake hands, embrace, we don’t do these things any more. There is so much we don’t do any more. Look at the shape of the show. So now is the time for us to get creative, how we, as the incoming generation into the workforce, are going to reshape the economy. There are lots of hands up, I’m going to come to some of you in a moment, butJess... I mean, I agree almost entirely with what Theo said in that the Government needs to act now to stimulate the jobs sphere and the people going forward. They are going to be a lost generation and, let’s face it, the young people today, people who are under 30 today, have pretty much lived their entire economic lives, since the 2008 downturn, and they’ve had to tighten their belts and have lost out on things that were there certainly when I was younger and the reality is that the Government needs to announce, already have announced, what it is going to do to help businesses get young people into training, into schemes like Theo says, there can be different sectors, different standards and it needs to be responsive, to what is actually happening out there. Because, without it, we’rejust going to end up with a generation lost and, even in the last week with regard to the tutoring that schoolchildren will now get, very welcome announcement, but an hour before the announcement was made, those aged 16—18 were taken out of it. And these are the people who we are going to need to help, they have already lost all their youth services, had their schools cut for the entire time they might have been there. Now is the time to step up, like Germany has already announced stimulus packages, and say what are we going to do to create jobs and training and to encourage businesses to take these people on? Because these are our children. Suresh. IONA: If I canjust... Iona, sorry, yes. I would say thatJess is absolutely right to say that colleges that help 16 to 19—year—olds should be included in the Covid catch up fund and that, actually, spending that little bit more time in education could make all the difference. So if we had targeted funding for booster courses that just allows young people to build up their skills before they go into the labour market, that could make all the difference between them being employable and attractive workers, and being on the jobs scrapheap. But I also think that this issue is too important to descend into party politics and we’ve been hearing for a long time about the need for a commission on social care because, understandably, that’s going to be extremely important to address after this crisis, but I wonder whether we also need a commission on young people’s opportunities and jobs. For the parties to work together and agree that they should be a priority and debate the details by all means, but try and transcend that party politics and come together. 50, Steve, lots of ideas being thrown in your direction. Targeted jobs for young people. Iona is talking about a commission, more emphasis on entrepreneurship from Kirsty. Well, on the one hand, move quick, and on the other, have a commission to talk about it more. I can assure Theo, there is no shortage of graft in the Treasury and officials, if you look at the schemes they are putting in place at speed, like the furlough, the self—employment, the grandson so forth, the grants amd so forth, the self—employment, the grants and so forth, have covered a lot to protectjobs, but I absolutely agree that, then, the next phase to that is how then for those jobs we are not able to protect and the Chancellor has been very candid, we can’t protect everyjob. There will be changes and as the questioner picked up, there are changes in the way people are working. The use of online, and if you look at GPs, the percentage of GPs that are using online GP surgeries before the pandemic, now it is up to 99%, pretty much all, so there are changes to how people are operating online. That will change the workplace and we are in very active discussions with employers, particularly small and medium employers, to see what schemes we can put in place to support them. But the first priority was protect as manyjobs as possible. Over 9 million have been through the furlough scheme, but we then need to look at the next phase, which is how, particularly on things like apprenticeships, we get the right skills, working with the National Citizen service as well, to get the right careers advice, the right skills and the right training to get people moving forward. Sorry, can Ijustjump in? I really want to commend the Treasury for stepping in and providing so much support under the furlough arrangements. You mentioned that idea of a commission for a young people being kind of "Talk about it more" but I think there is something more to be said about focusing on the opportunities and the challenges that will be faced by this generation and getting some significant indication of government commitment to this issue. There are a number of issues, especially when we talk about housing, it is a common concern across this generation, in which the Government has made a lot of the right noises and talked about commitments it is going to make. Not necessarily this government, but this generation of Conservative government. And we retroactively find out that what has been happening behind the scenes, when there are no eyes on the process, is flying in the face of the sounds you have been making. Specifically what prompted me to say that was the recent revelations about the RobertJenrick situation, the Housing Minister, that has come under fire for signing off on a development, a £1 billion development that looks to undermined the provision to undermine the provision of social housing in the community that this thing is planned in. So I guess, as a generation, we sometimes question the sincerity with which you engage the challenges of our age group and vulnerable communities. I know you want to come back on this, we actually have a question that addresses this point from Luke McRoy—Jones. Luke. Hi, there. Given the Covid—19 pandemic has disproportionately affected certain groups, including the young, how should the Government ensure there’s more support for social and affordable housing and possibly less luxury apartments? And, Luke, I assume you’re referring to the Housing and Local Communities Secretary RobertJenrick, who has obviously been on the front pages of the papers for a few days now, but this development in Tower Hamlets in London which is now being reviewed, financed by Richard Desmond and his company. The question is about should the Government be doing more to support social and affordable housing. Jess? Well, yes. Every government that has existed since, I would say, probably the 19705 should have done more to build social housing and to ensure that any stock that was lost through the sale of social housing was replaced at at least an equal value. The Government, only in 2018, allowed councils to borrow money to build social housing, which they had stopped in 2012. So for that entire period, they had stopped councils being able to borrow money in order to build council housing. It was only lifted a couple of years ago and I have absolutely no idea, idea why, other than what it seems is that what that does is give the whip hand to reach developers to be the only people in the market to rich developers to be the only people in the market for house—building, and we can see from the RobertJenrick affair how powerful they actually are, sending chummy text messages, talking about not giving money, or "doe", is the term that was used, I believe, to the Marxists in Tower Hamlets, which means the children and the adults that would have used the hospitals and schools that that money would have gone to. So, yes, they absolutely need to be doing more. We all need to be doing more. I’m sure the Minister on the panel will say, "We’ve done much more than the Labour Party ever did," it is a stock standard line and come at you know what, it is a stock standard line and, do you know what, the Labour Party should have built more houses. And so should this government build considerably more houses that people can actually afford to live in. Theo. Again, we are letting something overshadow what is really going on out here at the moment and there is no question in my mind that, as part of the reinvestment to get the economy going and get us out of this mess that we are undoubtedly going to get into, is a massive investment in social housing. And we must start a massive programme of building, and boost the economy, create... I mean, there is a massive shortage. It is not rocket science. There is a massive shortage, we need to get people back at work, we need to invest where people need it, so social housing is the obvious place for us to go straight into, like now. Not requiring any more reports, just get on with it. Hannah, I can see you want to come in. I completely agree that we need more social housing. People who live in social housing in cramped conditions, because there are no social housing for them, and other underprivileged people, die disproportionately from Covid—19 compared to their more privileged peers. Holly. This seems like atypical Conservative, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. This shouldn’t be something that is a secondary thought about, these are people that require houses. This is one of the number one priorities and, unfortunately, with Covid, it’s just gotten worse, so stop promising us X, Y and Z and actually go and build it. Suresh. I welcomed the demand in terms of the Government investment in the youth and social housing and things like that, but I come to the point I made at the beginning and I agree with Theo. To do and to fulfil those demands, what we need to be doing is make sure the economy is restarted in a proportionate and a sensible way. I think there’s been a lot of unfair criticism to the Government by some of the panellists here and some of the other viewers. I think they should be applauded for the furloughing scheme they have done. This is an unprecedented situation. The only way they can invest more is if they can get the economy going. Iona. Well, the housing crisis in the UK is extraordinarily complicated. AsJess said, it is one that we have had for decades, that successive governments really have failed to tackle comprehensively. When you look at these specific case of RobertJenrick, I don’t want to comment on the details of the case but what I do want to say is that, in this country, the new build housing industry needs to be held to account for building homes that are overpriced, to shoddy standards. And, in the last week, we have seen a young couple in Leicestershire hanging a banner from the front of their house saying, "Buying this new build home is the worst decision we ever made. "Come and ask us why." Obviously, the developer wasn’t happy about that and try to have it stopped but that was their experience and, unfortunately, it is all too common. What we need is to have really radical reform. To be fair, we hear a lot of sense from the Government about how we are going to kick the planning laws into touch, which is exactly what we need, we need to have reform of land value. So need, we need to have reform of land value. 50 when developers buy up the value. So when developers buy up the land, they get value. 50 when developers buy up the land, they get all the benefits from the gain in value of owning that land. None of it is shared with the community. But what we need is to share those profits with the community so they can be invested community so they ran be invested back into community so they can be invested back into social and affordable housing and local infrastructure. To housing and [oral infrastmclure. To be fair, the housing and local infrastructure. To be fair, the community structure be fair, the community stmcture levy was be fair, the community structure levy was supposed to do that. However, all too often, it tends to be negotiated away by powerful developers and councils gave in because they just want to get developers and councils gave in because theyjust want to get more because they just want to get more houses because theyjust want to get more houses built in the local area come houses built in the [oral area come what may. So houses built in the local area come what may. 50 that has not been what may. So that has not been working and I what may. 50 that has not been working and I think that has been around longer than the current Conservative generation of politicians. George, obviously you have talked about the Robert politicians. George, obviously you have talked about the RobertJenrick situation already, but in terms of social housing overall... Yes, for a while. As has been alluded to, the stock of social housing has been slipping into the private sector. A lot of the times, it is negotiations the community have not been privy to. In 2018, the Government did mandate that, for developments above a certain number, communities need to be consulted. That is a welcome change but there is something more pernicious that has been happening in the reduction of the social housing stock for a while. Quite a few of you with hands up. Katie, you were nodding. I happen to live in an area of Worcestershire that has quite a lot of green belt. Whilst we quite a lot of green belt. whilst we do need a quite a lot of green belt. Whilst we do need a lot quite a lot of green belt. Whilst we do need a lot more houses, we need to be quite environmental about it. There are a lot of houses that are mn down There are a lot of houses that are run down and buildings that we could mn down and buildings that we could knock run down and buildings that we could knock down and rebuild where they are and make them better than the new build are currently being built. So why on earth are contracts being taken out on green belt, which should be protected environmentally, when there are brown belt places and places that should be knocked down and built with better houses? Surely that would make and built with better houses? Surely that would make better use of the space that is already there. Iman. I also wanted space that is already there. Iman. I also wanted to mention about rent regulations. Especially in London, rent is far too high for what people rent is far too high for what peopla are earning and rent is far too high for what people are earning and I think the Government needs to do more for people, because, as a young person, it is almost impossible to save for a deposit when I’m paying the rent in London that is extortion to high and trying to save for a deposit, so I think rent regulations is another point the Government needs to look into. Luca, you asked the question. point the Government needs to look into. Luca, you asked the question. I think another important consideration here is that the same city that the £1 billion development was improved in was the same city that three years ago to this month at the Grenfell Tower tragedy and still there are blocks in the UK wood cladding on deemed to be dangerous, so when is the Government actually going to act and protect peopla in actually going to act and protect people in this tower block housing? peopla in this tower block housing? I don’t people in this tower block housing? I don’t know if it has been covered, but the CIO that Levy. The community struck... Which is paid for by struck... which is paid for by developers struck... Which is paid for by developers and goes to the council to use for local service. In this to use for [oral service. In this Robert jenrick to use for local service. In this RobertJenrick case it is said the Robert jenrick rase it is said the decision RobertJenrick case it is said the decision to green light that one billion development was fast—tracked billion development was fast-tracked so as to help billion development was fast—tracked so as to help the developer avoid a 40 so as to help the developer avoid 3 A0 million plus payment, into what 40 million plus payment, into what the A0 million plus payment, into what the community, that levelly would have mandated. I would like to make a clarify rare, I have mandated. I would like to make a clarify care, I don’t think it was a clarify rare, I don’t think it was the a clarify care, I don’t think it was the Government that in 2018 decided communities should be consulted, I think it was the mayor. Steve. We need to built, build, build and that means getting construction sites up means getting constmction sites up and mnning means getting construction sites up and running we have been supported and mnning we have been supported them, but and running we have been supported them, but planning is an impediment is so we are planning to look at that in legislation and see what we that in lagislation and see what we ran do to that in legislation and see what we can do to speed that up. Katie is ran do to speed that up. Katie is worried can do to speed that up. Katie is worried about the green belt. We made very big investments into that, in the budget as well. But I think it is also looking about how we build better, because one of the things I am passionate about is modern methods of construction, how modern methods of constmction, how we build quicker modern methods of construction, how we build quicker it is better modern methods of construction, how we build quicker it is betterfrom a we build quicker it is better from a climate change we build quicker it is betterfrom a climate change perspective. Energy use is lower so we can build better use is lower so we ran build better as well, but use is lower so we can build better as well, but the Government is investing, has committed significant funds to this, in response to Grenfell in particular, we committed at the budget additional funding to that, some of the schemes have been slowed down because of Covid and the difficulty of doing work on that, I was talking with one of difficulty of doing work on that, I was talking with one ofJess’s was talking with one of jess’s colleagues was talking with one ofJess’s colleagues about that was talking with one ofJess’s colleagues about that just yesterday, but we have committed funding to that, we are committed to build and one of the key things we ran do build and one of the key things we can do now is get construction sites ran do now is get constmction sites “P ran do now is get constmction sites up and mnning can do now is get construction sites up and running so the industry can up and mnning so the industry ran bounce up and running so the industry can bounce back. You have quite a job on your hands, you have over a million households on the social housing waiting list and in 2018/19 in England, 38,000 new social housing units were built. That is a heck of a discrepancy. That is why we have presence thenned the safety net. One of the measures we took was to change the, the rent that is covered to 30%, to support people in terms to 3096, to support peopla in terms of the to 30%, to support people in terms of the cost of rent, we have taken measures specifically about the challenges of people paying their challanges of peopla paying their rent by challenges of people paying their rent by providing protection for five months but ultimately this is the supply and demand issue. The key thing we need do is build more homes, we are committed to funding that, but we also need to make the planning system more friendly to delivering on that, and we also need to look a the skills and it comes back to the earlier point, you know, back to the eartier point, you know, skills for young back to the earlier point, you know, skills for young people who we need to find employment for, the construction industry is a key part constmction industry is a key part of that, the construction industry is a key part of that, the infrastructure we are of that, the infrastmcture we are committing, of that, the infrastructure we are committing, and that is how we bounce back from the pandemic we faced. Let us take another one from Emma. The changes What changes that we have made in society in response to coronavirus should be kept once restrictions are lifted? Who wants to kick us off. Have you who wants to kick us off. Have you got one in mind Who wants to kick us off. Have you got one in mind Jess? There are some got one in mind jess? There are some things I have got one in mind Jess? There are some things I have enjoyed about it. I have enjoyed being home a bit more, maybe we could move Westminster to Birmingham, post coronavirus, that Birmingham, post coronavims, that would be good. Birmingham, post coronavirus, that would be good. Good luck with that. There has been a couple of things actually, that we should keep, and I think that, there will be an element of creativity that comes out of this in tech sectors and how we have ﬂexibility, in in tech sectors and how we have flexibility, in our lives a bit ﬂexibility, in our lives a bit more. flexibility, in our lives a bit more. Though I have for many years been campaigning for flexibility, been campaigning for ﬂexibility, day one, been campaigning for flexibility, day one, largely for working mothers, although it would account for all working parents and you have been told no you count work from home, you wouldn’t be getting enough done and we have learned that is different now, we have learned we ran be as different now, we have learned we can be as productive when we are at ran be as productive when we are at home, if not, can be as productive when we are at home, if not, but I also think, from the perspective of somebody who fares the perspective of somebody who cares deeply about domestic violence fares deeply about domestic violence and cares deeply about domestic violence and vulnerable people in their home, that for the first time the public has sort of woken up to the idea of what it would be like to be controlled, and to be a prisoner in your own home, and I have seen a massive outpouring of support and rare massive outpouring of support and care about that particular issue, as rare about that particular issue, as well as, a real care about that particular issue, as well as, a real love and support for some of our key worker, people we can’t actually live without, it didn’t turn out to be the people who didn’t turn out to be the peopla who maybe didn’t turn out to be the people who maybe were getting paid the most, it turned out to be low maybe were getting paid the most, it turned out to below paid, key turned out to be low paid, key worker, turned out to below paid, key worker, often migrant workers, and I think that there is a kindness in a community that has been born. Look, hands up among the audience, Kofi. ﬂ lam I am interested to know the regime of wearing massings on public transport. Going forward in the long-term transport. Going forward in the long—term would that be maintained long-term would that be maintained and will shops long—term would that be maintained and will shops and stalls and public gather eings adopt a policy where we have to wear a mask if we want to be havetowearamaskifwewanttobe in havetowearamaskifwewanttobe ina havetoweara maskifwewantto be in a shop, and will have to wear a mask if we want to be in a shop, and will there always been a restricted number of people who ran been a restricted number of people who can enter the gym at a time. Is who ran enter the gym at a time. Is that something. . . who can enter the gym at a time. Is that something... Is that something you want to see then, permanent you know, a perm Nance to face coveringings that sort of thing? Yes, in particular, spaces, probably like maybe shops and gyms and public transport, because when you are coming into contact with so many peopla like coming into contact with so many people like that, then we are still, peopla like that, then we are still, as far as, people like that, then we are still, as far as, there is a lot we don’t know about it and its rates of transmission, it is important that we still have that protection and maintain sort of the policy as you said, like this was a new normal. Ben? I said, like this was a new normal. Ben? Iagree said, like this was a new normal. Ben? I agree with what said, like this was a new normal. Ben? I agree with whatJess was Ben? I agree with whatjess was saying about Ben? I agree with whatJess was saying aboutjob Ben? I agree with whatJess was saying about job flexibility. Ben? I agree with whatJess was saying aboutjob flexibility. In the saying about job ﬂaxibility. In the future saying aboutjob flexibility. In the future we will see more people future we will see more peopla working from future we will see more people working from home, certainly more of the time. I mean especially speaking personally as a chemist, I work in a lab every day but my company’s introduced a policy of working in the lab now on alternative weeks and working from home on other weeks and that has been working well, and so I definitely think we will be seeing that going forward. And another thing, hopefully, to see in the future as well, is just better hygiene across the board because I think this pandemic has increased awareness of hygiene and good hygiene practises so I think that will be a beneficial thing in the future with hand San teaser. Will future with hand San teaser. will you be future with hand San teaser. Will you be washing your hands more, and what changes would you like to see made? We will never be the same again, technology has been changing our lives over years now but over the last three months, I think, technology, has been accelerated by at least five years in the way we adopted it and we are using it, for me I can’t see myself having offices with that many people in ever again. with that many peopla in ever again. I with that many people in ever again. I mean the first thing we will be doing, speaking to colleagues, is cutting down the number of days peopla cutting down the number of days people come into the offices which means we will need less espace, people will will be able to balance peopla will will be able to balance their people will will be able to balance their lives better and technology has done that, retail will be different as Westminster. People have adopted online a lot faster than they would have done, so we are going to see more pressure on our high street stores and that is again, something the Government have got to do something about and in the rates deferral, holiday was brilliant, get rid of it. Don’t bring it back, it don’t make sense. It is a tax from the 15005, life’s moved on, the internet did not exist in the 15005. 15005. You need to give our services but you have to do the work, get rid of it. It is destroying the fabric of society. 50 destroying the fabric of society. So lots of things will have to change. What would you like to keep Iona? I what would you like to keep Iona? I agree working What would you like to keep Iona? I agree working from home is more civilised where possible but we should bear in mind that actually young people do need hands on young peopla do need hands on training, young people do need hands on training, mentoring, in the workplace, and you can’t bring on all your interpersonal skills through Zoom. I am mentoring someone who is interrow verityed and shy and it is difficult for her to become more confident talking to her colleagues online. I think that working from home has been a luxury that older people have been able to enjoy because they have had a lot of access to outdoor space perhaps and they have had better access to outdoor space perhaps and they have had betterfacilities but they have had better facilities but younger they have had betterfacilities but younger people have been cooped up, typically... It is a balance. We maybe have to balance but in the future, we are going to have to by a saysed how we spend our money, prior your to this perhaps we had a buoyant consumer economy and obviously we want, we want that to come back but at the same time individuals are looking at what they spent their money on and are asking does this align with my value, did I need to boy that many clothes when I know what damage it does to the environment? But there are certain things I want to come back, because I don’t want to keep consuming my arts and culture on YouTube and Zoom. We are facing a culture disaster. What would you 0 keep disaster. what would you o keep George? disaster. What would you 0 keep George? What would disaster. What would you o keep George? What would you keep? If you George? what would you keep? If you have to pick George? What would you keep? If you have to pick one thing? I would keep, I have to pick one thing? I would keep, Iwould have to pick one thing? I would keep, I would say, up swing in general rare, keep, I would say, up swing in general care, and etiquette that we general rare, and etiquette that we have now, general care, and etiquette that we have now, understanding we are in a pandemic, understanding that people pandemic, understanding that peopla have pandemic, understanding that people have been endangered. I have felt that person—to—person has been a bit that person-to-person has been a bit more sensitivity, that person—to—person has been a bit more sensitivity, and atentativeness in how we check on each other and protect each other, especially from some of the online behaviours that might affect our emotional and mental wellbeing. Steve? What would mental wellbeing. Steve? what would you keep? For mental wellbeing. Steve? What would you keep? For me within Government it is the speed at which we act across departments so if I look at the programme of getting food parcels to the most vulnerable as part of the shielding programme, or the way we have been able to support the homeless through this crisis, the homelass through this crisis, get peopla the homeless through this crisis, get people off the streets, we saw the Government acting in a different “Y the Government acting in a different way to perhaps the traditional model. There is a lot that comes from a pandemic where people come together, with a common cause, act much more quickly as Theo says in being more data driven round where the technology is being used for the benefit of people, there is ways that Government can operate, coming that Government ran operate, coming out of the that Government can operate, coming out of the pandemic, where we can out of the pandemic, where we ran move much out of the pandemic, where we can move much more quickly and be more data driven. Taking your Government hat off, on a personal level, what you would you keep? As someone with two children under ten, seeing more of the family with that home—working, all of us in Parliament spend a lot of time away Partiament spend a lot of time away from home, Parliament spend a lot of time away from home, so Parliament spend a lot of time away from home, sol Parliament spend a lot of time away from home, so I think actually that’s a expect is something I really enjoyed and many of us, the ﬂexibility really enjoyed and many of us, the flexibility round that will be great ﬂexibility round that will be great to keep. On a flexibility round that will be great to keep. On a frivolous note, I have to say the one thingly look forward to is not having to queue in the bar at the pub. If you can sit at the at the pub. If you ran sit at the table and at the pub. If you can sit at the table and Suwan Nakanong to bring your drink, I would like to keep that. A couple of hands, I will quickly, let me get round you. Niamh? One thing that would be important to keep is Spotlight on issues that have come out, women in abusive homes and members of the LGBTQ, and the appreciation of key workers and the central worker, health workers in particular, and I hope that is something that people hope that is something that peopla won’t forget hope that is something that people won’t forget about and I hope we won’t get to the point where we are clapping when we are denying nurses pay rises, instead we are clapping in appreciation. Holly, what would you keep? I in appreciation. Holly, what would you keep? Iagree in appreciation. Holly, what would you keep? I agree with George, I you keep? Iagree with George, I think we you keep? I agree with George, I think we could keep kindness and appreciation for our front line team, as I have said before, but also, why don’t we as a nation be a bit less materialistic, I don’t bit lass materialistic, I don’t think bit less materialistic, I don’t think people have wanted to go on think peopla have wanted to go on fancy think people have wanted to go on fancy holidays or drive fancy cars, you probably fancy holidays or drive fancy cars, you probablyjust wanted to cuddle a you probably just wanted to cuddle a loved one, you probablyjust wanted to cuddle a loved one, so... Lots of really interesting thoughts there, I really wanted to end on that and see what you would have to say. Thank you. Our hour is up and so is this series of Question Time we are taking a break. We will be back in September, who knows what the programme will be like then? Will we have an audience like then? will we have an audience in the room, I like then? Will we have an audience in the room, I don’t know. We will see where we are then. But thank you very much for the moment, if you want to carry on tonight’s discussion you can want to carry on tonight’s discussion you canjoin want to carry on tonight’s discussion you can join Question discussion you ranjoin Question Time discussion you can join Question Time Extra Time on 5 Live. Thank you to the panel for coming in to the studio. jess, to the panel for coming in to the studio. Jess, thank you for to the panel for coming in to the studio. Jess, thank you forjoining studio. jess, thank you for joining us down studio. Jess, thank you forjoining us down the line and our audience of under 30, thank you, trying to get you in, I under 30, thank you, trying to get you in, Iappreciate under 30, thank you, trying to get you in, I appreciate your comments and thank you at home for watching, we will see you after the summer, have a good summer, stay safe, from Question Time. Bye.