Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi, the Business and Industry Minister, formerty Business and Industry Minister, formerly minister Business and Industry Minister, formerly ministerfor Business and Industry Minister, formerly minister for children and formerty minister for children and families. formerly minister for children and families. Labour’s newly appointed Shadow families. Labour’s newly appointed ShadowJustice Secretary, David Shadow justice Secretary, David hmmﬁ ShadowJustice Secretary, David Lemmy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse lammy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse and specialist in Lemmy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse and specialist in medical law and child protection, now and specialist in medical law and child protection, new chief executive of the Royal child protection, now chief executive of the Royal College of Nursing. Joining us down the line Nursing. joining us down the line from Nursing. Joining us down the line from Aberdeen, professor of bacteriology at Aberdeen University and expert on diseases like E. Coli and BSE, Hugh Pennington. Welcome to my guests here in the studio and to 7°“- my guests here in the studio and to you, and to shoot down the line. We are delighted to have a virtual audience with us, courtesy of video links, and this week they are from Southampton. Hello to all of you, very nice to have you here. If you are watching from home, you can very nice to have you here. If you are watching from home, you canjoin are watching from home, you ranjoin in the are watching from home, you canjoin in the conversation on social media. Let’s start with our first question, which is from Olu Rowe. Thank you. Recent events in the US are arguably a direct result of decades or centuries of African—Americans centuries of African-Americans feeling centuries of African—Americans feeling oppressed in numerous areas, including rareer feeling oppressed in numerous areas, including career opportunities, health care, economics or politics. health rare, economic or politic. To what health care, economics or politics. To what extent does the panel think that the UK suffers from similar systematic racial issues, and what do you believe we can do to address do you believe we ran do to address this? of do you believe we can do to address this? Of course, this is prompted by the horrific death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. David? Well, er... George Floyd looks like us, could be us, but George Floyd looks like us, could be us, butl George Floyd looks like us, could be us, but I think what’s striking about this moment is that, when you look at the protest, it’s black and white, it’s of course many young peopla, all white, it’s of course many young people, all kinds of people saying peopla, all kinds of peopla saying enough is people, all kinds of people saying enough is enough. And his last words were, I enough is enough. And his last words were, Iran’t enough is enough. And his last words were, I can’t breathe. People are saying, not just were, I can’t breathe. People are saying, notjust in America but also saying, not just in America but also in this country, saying, notjust in America but also in this country, of course, that none of us can breathe, none of us none of us ran breathe, none of us ran breathe none of us can breathe, none of us can breathe with this structural ran breathe with this stmctural racism can breathe with this structural racism and discrimination that is, yes, "TY racism and discrimination that is, yes, very deep in America but is also present in our own society. David Cameron asked me to do a review four years ago on the problems of an overrepresentation of problams of an overrepresentation of black problems of an overrepresentation of black and Asians and minority ethnic peopla in the black and Asians and minority ethnic people in the criminal black and Asians and minority ethnic people in the criminaljustice peopla in the criminal justice system, people in the criminaljustice system, and it is the case that, in system, and it is the rase that, in our own country, system, and it is the case that, in our own country, you are nine times more likely to be stopped and searched by the police. During this coronavims, searched by the police. During this coronavirus, 52% of those who are coronavims, 5296 of those who are getting fines coronavirus, 52% of those who are getting fines are black, Asian or minority ethnic people. Over the last, well, since 1990, 183 black, Asian and minority ethnic people Asian and minority ethnic peopla have Asian and minority ethnic people have died in police custody stop so we have our own problems here. What we have our own problems here. what ran you do? Well, we have our own problems here. What can you do? Well, the first thing is ran you do? Well, the first thing is all of us can you do? Well, the first thing is all of us have to stop accepting —— all of us have to stop accepting -- expecting black all of us have to stop accepting —— expecting black people to make the rase expecting black people to make the use for expecting black people to make the case for structural racism and use for stmctural racism and educate case for structural racism and educate yourself of there are some fantastic books out there by various authors who have written about the subject. Educate yourself stop challenge your friends, your family, of course, on social media, people of course, on social media, peopla who are dearty of course, on social media, people who are clearly racist, it’s got to who are dearty racist, it’s got to stop. when who are clearly racist, it’s got to stop. When you look at social media, stop. when you look at social media, it’s full of it, stop. When you look at social media, it’s full of it, and I will see it again tonight after the end of the show. Ask your politicians, your MP, your councillor to do something about racial profiling. Get involved and, if you must protest, I applaud and, ifyou must protest, Iapplaud those who and, if you must protest, I applaud those who are taking to the streets in our country, dog did you take to the streets? Brexit because I’m a pub“: the streets? Brexit because I’m a public servant, I have a position of 7 7! 7 7777777 77777 7 777 777, 77 , Mud-positioni— — . . W“ I mum ' mm. '°n.°f_.— you can’t responsibility and I think you ain’t on responsibility and I think you can’t on one week condemn Dominic Cummings for travelling up the country and the next go out in public. Because of social distance? Socially distance, take your sanitiser, where your mask but, yes, protest, make some noise and take this all the way to November, because we know what Donald Tmmp is to November, because we know what Donald Trump is up to. This is Donald Tmmp is up to. This is deliberate, Donald Trump is up to. This is deliberate, the military, they are railing for deliberate, the military, they are calling for shooting, his behaviour, railing for shooting, his behaviour, he is winding calling for shooting, his behaviour, he is winding up parts of his face who want to see this conflict between black and white in his country, because he thinks it might keep him in office. Stand up to it. Your question was about does the UK suffer from Your question was about does the UK sufferfrom similar Your question was about does the UK suffer from similar systemic racial issues. What is your view and issues. what is your view and experience? issues. What is your view and experience? Well, I issues. What is your view and experience? Well, Ithink, without question, I think everyone would know. I think we’ve come from a time, talking about going back decades and centuries, where there were structural implementations that were stmctural implementations that were were structural implementations that were conscious that disadvantaged black people and people of colour, black peopla and peopla of colour, and black people and people of colour, and then we’ve moved forward into a situation whereby it’s probably stubborn, a stubborn approach to, 0K, we know there is something going on. No, we are not really ready to do that yet. And then, probably more recently, it’s been more like an apathy for sub is the spotlight on us? Not really, let’s leave it for a bit. But now the spotlight is on, and obviously prevention is always better than cure, and here we are in a situation where, if prevention had been implemented, then we wouldn’t see the ugliness that we’ve seen, in terms of... What I mean is, in terms terms of... what I mean is, in terms of the protest, I’m terms of... What I mean is, in terms of the protest, I’m not calling that ugliness, I’m calling that desperate ugliness, I’m falling that desperate and ugliness, I’m calling that desperate and passionate. These are ugly scenes, nobody wants to see this. They have been lots of peaceful protests and you are talking about those where there has been violence and looting. Yes. I wanted to ask, Donna, looking at your career, which is stellar, you must have broken through quite a few glass ceilings to get where you have. You still see systemic issues of racism in the UK? As a nurse, you see it every day. You see it both in the structure you You see it both in the stmcture you are within, in You see it both in the structure you are within, in the institution of health, the NHS institution. If you look at how many managers have broken through the glass ceiling, black managers, you will see there are very few Philip but also, as a nurse, we face these issues on a daily basis stop at the outcomes for our patients. Every single measure that you ran our patients. Every single measure that you can apply, the outcomes are that you ran apply, the outcomes are worse for that you can apply, the outcomes are worse for black and minority ethnic patients. Whether it is diabetes, whether it is those that end up with amputations, the structure of our amputations, the stmcture of our society is amputations, the structure of our society is inherent, the structural society is inherent, the stmctural racism is society is inherent, the structural racism is inherent, and the outcomes are poor for a racism is inherent, and the outcomes are poorfor a number of people that are poor for a number of peopla that are of black, are poorfor a number of people that are of black, Asian and minority ethnic communities. 50, are of black, Asian and minority ethnic communities. So, personally to me in ethnic communities. 50, personally to me in terms of my career, yes, we do have to bash down some glass ceilings and circumvent some overtly racist peopla, ceilings and circumvent some overtly racist people, but for me just look racist peopla, but for me just look at the racist people, but for me just look at the health of our nation, and that will tell you about some of the structural inequalities that we stmctural inequalities that we have. structural inequalities that we have. Is racism something you have had direct experience of? Yes, to the question, I don’t think anyone of my colour or Olu ‘s, or David or Donna would say they haven’t, it’ll most impossible to when we first name most impossible to when we first came to this country, my parents fame to this country, my parents fame as came to this country, my parents came as Kurdish immigrants from fame as Kurdish immigrants from Iran, the came as Kurdish immigrants from Iran, the first thing people called Iran, the first thing peopla rallad me was Iran, the first thing people called me was a Pakistani, and then I had to explain that I was really Kurdish, and then you got bullied. I saw a horrific video online of two white kids are scared black kid to go down and kiss their feet. You get that sort of behaviour at school at the time. But you try and survive it. I’d like to think things have changed and they have in many ways, but I think some of it has been transformed to social media. Back to David Button point or mine or Donna, you still get casual racism every day, he doesn’t quite belong in Stratford—on—Avon, you know, he Stratford-on-Avon, you know, he isn’t from Stratford—on—Avon, you know, he isn’t from here. That sort of thing that it’s difficult for somebody with a name like Zahawi to claim he is born and bred in Stratford but nonetheless I think things are getting better and lots of people are speaking up. Millions of people are speaking up. Millions of peopla have are speaking up. Millions of people have come out and said, enough is enough. Tag the equalities minister said today that the UK plan, Cribbs is one of the best countries in the world the quality because there are lots of great things that happened in this country that have allowed people like that have allowed peopla like myself, that have allowed people like myself, David and Donat to do well, but we can myself, David and Donat to do well, but we ran go myself, David and Donat to do well, but we can go much further. I did but we ran go much further. I did this in the but we can go much further. I did this in the Department for Education when I was families minister, working with the permanent secretary, because the permanent secretary there basically didn’t think that we were trying hard enough because, if you look at the profile of the civil service, of parliamentarians, there are very few partiamentarians, there are very few people of my parliamentarians, there are very few people of my colour or David Button peopla of my colour or David Button colour in people of my colour or David Button colour in the leadership roles in those institutions. Even in the health service. We need to do better. There is no point us health service. We need to do better. There is no point usjust better. There is no point us just saying, it’s OK, better. There is no point usjust saying, it’s OK, and that’s fine. We have to do better. I have to share this with the audience. My seven—year—old came up to me, seven-year-old name up to me, unprompted, seven—year—old came up to me, unprompted, and said, dad, black lives matter, and I looked and said, where did you get that from? She says, dad, I got it from TikTok and YouTube stop I said, what does it mean? She says, it means nobody should be killed because of their colour. So presumably Trump’s comments about, when the looting starts, the shooting starts, you condemn that? any comments which caused division, I condemn that. I condemn that, at any other comment which divides us. George W Bush made which divides us. George w Bush made a which divides us. George W Bush made a beautiful statement about how you bring people together, the country together, and I want to think of the millions of people who will peacefully go out and demonstrate the not the few agitators for the let’s hear from our the not the few agitators for the let’s hearfrom our audience. Laura. let’s hear from our audience. laura. I let’s hear from our audience. laura. Ijust let’s hear from our audience. laura. I just want to say let’s hearfrom our audience. Laura. I just want to say that you are talking about how you want to address the racism in this country, but the problem is, if we don’t start speaking out, if the government doesn’t start speaking out and condemning what is going on in America right now then we are being bystanders and watching this happen, and we are not trying to stop it, and I think it’s all well and good leaving the responsibility to the public to be protesting at a time and we should be social distancing but, because the government is doing nothing, they are complicit in the action the pub“: are complicit in the action the public is having to take to show our support for America, public is having to take to show our support forAmerica, because public is having to take to show our support for America, because nobody in the government is doing that. First of all, I want to thank David Lammy for the work he has done on educating nonblack people for years educating nonblack peopla for years on this educating nonblack people for years on this issue. But I also wanted to address Nadhim Zahawi in asking him what his government is doing to improve the curriculum in schools? I think a huge amount of the problem here comes from a lack of education about black history in the UK, because it’s all well and good as looking at the United States now from a distance and saying, this isn’t our problem, but we had a isn’t our problam, but we had a huge, long isn’t our problem, but we had a huge, long history in the UK from slavery at our ports to Windrush, slavery at our ports to windrush, the slavery at our ports to Windrush, the MacPherson report, and then Diane Abbott becoming one of the first black MPs in the country. We don’t learn that and now we have Bellingham agenda, who it looks like the justice system has given up on, and it’s because we don’t learn about these black voices, these black faces, and we just don’t know what our own history is. Hello. I just think it’s horrible, what’s just think it’s horribla, what’s happened, just think it’s horrible, what’s happened, but I wondered whether, bearing in mind all the positive vibes we’ve had, clapping every Thursday, we know that a lot of the peopla, and I Thursday, we know that a lot of the peopla, and lam Thursday, we know that a lot of the people, and I am sure Donna will peopla, and I am sure Donna will agree with me, people, and I am sure Donna will agree with me, who looked after us come from ethnic minorities. Should we not be harnessing that power and doing something with it right now, rather than allowing it to disappear? I wondered whether any of the politicians had ideas how we could do this. Hugh Pennington, I wanted to come to you on the original question. To what extent does the panel think the UK suffers from systematic racial issues similar to those in the States, and what ran similar to those in the States, and what can be done about it? Now, you what ran be done about it? Now, you were marching what can be done about it? Now, you were marching after the death of Martin Luther King, so you have seen this over many years. Custom cut that’s right. Really rather pessimistic. I lived in the US at that time, and there were terrible things happening, and I went to Chicago and the National Guard was out on the streets everything seems to repeat itself of the I think an important thing we must do, and I agree with the audience member who was talking about history, the US has this terrible legacy of slavery, and we have a legacy from the Empire. Clearly, these are very Empire. Clearty, these are very important Empire. Clearly, these are very important historical things which still have a big effect and, if we learn more about them... We should be learning about them at school, learning about what happened at what should be done correct any kind of problams that should be done correct any kind of problems that persist, and we know problams that persist, and we know that many problems that persist, and we know that many problems do persist. My that many problams do persist. My pessimism that many problems do persist. My pessimism will stay. I hope I am going to be more optimistic than that. After all, the US elected a that. After all, the US eluted a black that. After all, the US elected a black president, but it’s a work in progress. But it is work in progress that we must put our shoulder behind to make sure that things do improve. ﬂ I have got one more question, given what is happening these days, we really wanted to discuss the issue of race at the beginning of this programme and we have got a different take on it from Ashya Roberts. Can we hear your question? Roberts. (“an we hear your question? MY Roberts. (“an we hear your question? My question is Roberts. Can we hear your question? My question is should the government actively be doing more to actively be doing more to protect peopla from actively be doing more to protect people from ethnic minorities peopla from ethnic minorities against people from ethnic minorities against the virus? We had a report against the vims? We had a report and you will be against the virus? We had a report and you will be familiar with this. Age and sex are the biggest factors when it comes to coronavirus. But then you look at the Bangladeshi ethnicity, that is double the death rate of coronavirus compared to the white British and then other black Asian and minority ethnic groups tend to 50% more at risk. Is there tend to 5096 more at risk. Is there more that tend to 50% more at risk. Is there more that can be done in terms of more that ran be done in terms of staff, for more that can be done in terms of staff, for example? Is there more staff, for exampla? Is there more that ran staff, for example? Is there more that can be done to protect them as that ran be done to protect them as opposed to that can be done to protect them as opposed to their white counterparts? There has to be more that needs to be done. That whole report was commissioned on the basis of the question of why is this happening? Yet we have had surveillance, we have got statistics, but we have not have got statistic, but we have not yet answered have got statistics, but we have not yet answered why. Nobody expected an answer to come overnight, but surely there is much more we can do to there is much more we ran do to protect nursing there is much more we can do to protect nursing staff. I think there is something about adequate PPE and I was on this programme not long ago saying we needed the adequate PPE. Are you getting that now? It is still patchy. There are some hospitals that are getting it, but we know many care homes are we know many rare homes are stmggling to we know many care homes are struggling to receive PPE. We also stmggling to receive PPE. We also know struggling to receive PPE. We also know that those district nurses are still struggling to get proper PPE. still stmggling to get proper PPE. It is still struggling to get proper PPE. It is interesting that we have had the latest announcement about face coverings. . . the latest announcement about face coverings... Face coverings on pub“: coverings... Face coverings on public transport will be required from the 15th of public transport will be required from the 15th ofJune. But we from the 15th of june. But we struggle to from the 15th ofJune. But we struggle to get nurses to have masks when they are less than a metre away providing rare to when they are less than a metre away providing care to patients. There providing rare to patients. There has to be providing care to patients. There has to be more. Do you think that the main community nurses should be prioritised when it comes to the stats that we know and the more at risk they are? We do not know from this report whether it is linked to occupation or exposure. We know the viral load increases the more exposed you are to the virus. Many exposed you are to the vims. Many black, Asian exposed you are to the virus. Many black, Asian and minority ethnic peopla work black, Asian and minority ethnic people work in front line conditions, most of our nurses are at band five delivering care, our at band five delivering rare, our health at band five delivering care, our health care assistance, and there health rare assistance, and there are many health care assistance, and there are many questions yet to be answered. Obviously I am a public health nurse and I am looking for protection before the answer occur. So as much protection that we can So as much protection that we ran give people is So as much protection that we can give people is absolutely essential. If that means that those with undertying If that means that those with underlying conditions are redeployed undertying conditions are redeployed from underlying conditions are redeployed from the front line, so be it. Their protection is hugely important. That goes to my concern about the question that was as previously. I stood on the front line trying to fight for patients permit lives a few weeks ago and I do not want to see that trash. I put my own life at risk and so have many other health rare risk and so have many other health care workers. We really wa nt risk and so have many other health care workers. We really want people rare workers. We really want people if they are care workers. We really want people if they are protesting to observe social distancing because there is no point in us coming back to look after them because of another cause. 11 weeks now we have had this look down and she is still seen people who have not got PPE. How is that possibla? First who have not got PPE. How is that possible? First of all, that should possibla? First of all, that should not be possible? First of all, that should not be happening. I can tell you not be happening. I ran tell you from my own not be happening. I can tell you from my own local experience, both from my own [oral experience, both rare from my own local experience, both care homes and the NHS, they have rare homes and the NHS, they have got the PPE care homes and the NHS, they have got the PPE that they need. That is OK, but it is 11 weeks on and I have had countless people from the government saying we are sorting it, we are getting it out next weekend, all the lorries are on the way, it is not a question of supply, it is logistic, is not a question of supply, it is logistics, which turned out not to logistic, which turned out not to be the logistics, which turned out not to be the case in the end, how are we be the use in the end, how are we 11 weeks on, be the case in the end, how are we 11 weeks on, Donna is sitting there, and we still have not got PPE where peopla and we still have not got PPE where people need it? Both the experience [orally and people need it? Both the experience locally and nationally with the PPE [orally and nationally with the PPE is locally and nationally with the PPE is there. In Warwickshire it is therefore any care home as they therefore any rare home as they asked therefore any care home as they asked for. That is all very well. You have heard Donna’s experience. I am trying to answer the question. Don had a specific example and I will take that away and look at it because that should not be happening. What I will say in answer happening. what I will say in answer to your happening. What I will say in answer to your question is a couple of things. Professor to your question is a couple of things. ProfessorJohn Newton, the things. Professor john Newton, the expert on this, things. ProfessorJohn Newton, the expert on this, said that now that we have got the report the first thing that will happen is NHS England is getting it out to the NHS tmsts England is getting it out to the NHS trusts so they all have the data in front of them. Secondly, equalities minister is now in charge of making sure that whatever we do we follow the report findings and effectively take that and translate that into actions that we will take to make sure actually people of black, Asian sure actually peopla of black, Asian and minority sure actually people of black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds are protected. Hugh Pennington. The report was disappointing in the fact it did not come out with answers as to why peopla it did not come out with answers as to why people from Bangladesh are to why peopla from Bangladesh are more likely to why people from Bangladesh are more likely to die from this virus than other people of other different ethnic backgrounds. I can understand ethnic backgrounds. I ran understand why, to drill ethnic backgrounds. I can understand why, to drill down to the data you have to look at patients’ hospital have to look at patients“ hospital records have to look at patients’ hospital records to look at their particular circumstances. I sincerely hope that is proceeding with pace because that will be quite a long task. It will take a long time to do. I do this sort of thing for medical and legal work and it is very time consuming. However, it has to be done because we want to find out what is going wrong. why we want to find out what is going wrong. Why are people, say from wrong. why are peopla, say from Bangladesh, wrong. Why are people, say from Bangladesh, because they were at the top of the list in terms of mortality, why are they in that group? We cannot understand it. We don’t know. Is it something to do with lifestyle? Housing? Deprivation? Occupation? We cannot say. It is possible, that data is out there, but it will be difficult to accumulate it. We want to get that right now because the virus has not gone away. All these groups of people with high mortality rates, peopla with high mortality rates, that is people with high mortality rates, that is a peopla with high mortality rates, that is a very people with high mortality rates, that is a very strong measure, you rannot laugh that is a very strong measure, you cannot laugh that off, of course not, it is rightly important that while the virus persists we must do something to protect people who are something to protect peopla who are more at something to protect people who are more at risk in terms of having a very serious infection and dying from it. It is a no—brainer. We have from it. It is a no-brainer. We have got to get that from it. It is a no—brainer. We have got to get that work done. If you have to hire 20 PhD students to go through the notes, we should be doing it right now. Kieran, you have got your hand up. In light of the recent report is it safe for children to now return to school and workers to return to work from the ethnic minorities? This is what it comes down to. The question from Ashya Roberts is what should the government do to protect people? where government do to protect people? Where do the results of that report where do the results of that report takers? Where do the results of that report takers? Does it take us down the route of if you are from the BAME community, should the lockdown be tighter for community, should the lockdown be tighterfor you? community, should the lockdown be tighterforyou? Is community, should the lockdown be tighterfor you? Is that community, should the lockdown be tighter for you? Is that even remotely acceptable to think that? Should there be certain jobs you Should there be certainjobs you should Should there be certain jobs you should not be going back to? Or children not going back to school? Treating people differently because of their ethnic background? Let’s be clear, right across black and Asian communities in this country there is fear and anxiety. It is now getting to the stage where it is hard not to know someone who has died. I have lost an undo, a know someone who has died. I have lost an uncle, a classmate at A5. know someone who has died. I have lost an uncle, a classmate at AS. I lost an unda, a classmate at 45. I have lost lost an uncle, a classmate at AS. I have lost 20 people in my local have lost 20 peopla in my [oral mosque and have lost 20 people in my local mosque and six others in the other mosque. I have lost my Chief Rabbi in the community of Tottenham and in the community of Totbenham and Haringey. in the community of Tottenham and Haringey. People want action. What Haringey. People want action. what they rannot Haringey. People want action. What they cannot understand is... What they cannot understand is... what action they cannot understand is... What action should there be? We are being told where we can do physical told where we ran do physical exercise, told where we can do physical exercise, who we can meet, where we exercise, who we ran meet, where we ran travel, what exercise, who we can meet, where we can travel, what we should wear on ran travel, what we should wear on transport. There can travel, what we should wear on transport. There are guidelines and mles. People transport. There are guidelines and rules. People are told if you are of mles. People are told if you are of a certain age you rules. People are told if you are of a certain age you should protect yourself and stay away from the rest of your family. yourself and stay away from the rest of yourfamily. Ethnic yourself and stay away from the rest of your family. Ethnic minorities now want recommendations. They want risk assessments at work particularly because we are talking particularty because we are talking about a particularly because we are talking about a community of people who about a community of peopla who arrived about a community of people who arrived from Asia and the Caribbean who came to work in public services, the NHS, post offices, our transport system, London underground. They come into contact with many people come into contact with many peopla and we come into contact with many people and we have no answers. I say to Nadeem, I don’t want to say it in an angry Nadeem, I don’t want to say it in an 5"ng WY- Nadeem, I don’t want to say it in an angry way, but I say we need action now, not angry way, but I say we need action now, notjust angry way, but I say we need action now, not just the angry way, but I say we need action now, notjust the rhetoric about angry way, but I say we need action now, not just the rhetoric about all this is terrible, but where we have this is terribla, but where we have had this is terrible, but where we have had guidelines and rules for others, had guidelines and mles for others, ran we had guidelines and rules for others, can we now have some to protect and ran we now have some to protect and save lives? can we now have some to protect and save lives? If protecting the NHS and saving lives means something, it has to mean something also for black and ethnic minorities in our own country. And to Kieran’s question. 801: of country. And to Kieran’s question. 80% of schools country. And to Kieran’s question. 80% of schools remained open to make 8096 of schools remained open to make sure that 80% of schools remained open to make sure that the critical workers, the front line workers, and those children who are in need could actually still get to school. We are very slowly, deliberately slowly, asking schools to return for the earty years asking schools to return for the early years and of course year one earty years and of course year one and six as early years and of course year one and six as well. No, that is not what Kieran was talking about. I want to get to the... We have only got a limited time. You cannot have half an answer. You need to answer the question. Kieran’s point is should the question. Kieran’s point is should children from black and Asian minority and ethnic communities go to school because of that? I was about to say, if you allow me... I am all ears. If we all follow the social distancing rules, we have social distancing mles, we have issued social distancing rules, we have issued guidelines across education, the environment, construction, the the environment, constmction, the warehouses, the environment, construction, the warehouses, if you follow the rules warehouses, if you follow the mles and socially warehouses, if you follow the rules and socially distance and you wash your hands, you will be safe and we will continue to bear down. Whew, will continue to bear down. when, you wanted to will continue to bear down. Whew, you wanted to come in. One thing we ran say pretty you wanted to come in. One thing we can say pretty certainly from the ran say pretty certainly from the Pub“: can say pretty certainly from the Public Health England report is that children and anybody under 20 has a very low risk of having any kind of serious illness with this virus. serious illness with this vims. This very serious illness with this virus. This very small group of younger children with Kawasaki children with Kawasaki syndrome, they are at risk, but that is very rare. Young children do not fall ill in the first place. This is a peculiar virus because there is a very strong relationship between age and having a bad outcome. Those over 80 or 70 times more likely to die than peopla in 80 or 70 times more likely to die than people in their 405. That is an than peopla in their 405. That is an enormously than people in their 40s. That is an enormously impressive statistic which does not happen with any other vims. I which does not happen with any other vims. Iran which does not happen with any other vims. I ran put which does not happen with any other virus. I can put that in as reassurance that children will not get a serious illness and they will not have complications and so on. But one question that has not been answered is are they going to get the virus and take it home and in fact their parents and their grandparents? That is something that is still not certain. It does not look very likely, but, but, you cannot rule it out. Let’s take cannot mla it out. Let’s take another cannot rule it out. Let’s take another question from Lorraine jones. another question from Lorraine Jones. Doesn’t the 1A day quarantine jones. Doesn’t the 14 day quarantine for incoming Jones. Doesn’t the 1A day quarantine for incoming travellers to the UK seem pointless when we are mostly lagging behind the other European countries in getting control of the vims as countries in getting control of the virus as the main EU countries now have a lower transmission rate than the UK? That is the point, is this a use the UK? That is the point, is this a rase of shutting the UK? That is the point, is this a case of shutting the stable door rase of shutting the stable door after case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted? When after the horse has bolted? when other after the horse has bolted? When other countries had a higher infection rate we were letting them in and we still are, you can still in and we still are, you ran still come in in and we still are, you can still come in from Brazil, from New York, but now we are talking about stopping countries. In the case of stopping countries. In the rase of Europe they stopping countries. In the case of Europe they have all got a lower infection rates than we have. It’s an important question. When It’s an important question. when this virus It’s an important question. When this virus was in the containment phase, when we could contain it, it was right that we introduced quarantine and effectively dealing with people coming from Li Wenliang with peopla coming from Li Wenliang and the with people coming from Li Wenliang and the rest of China in early and the rest of China in earty january. But and the rest of China in early January. But we let everybody else january. But we let everybody else come. As January. But we let everybody else come. As it turned out, the Italians and the Spanish had a huge infection rate but we let them come in. We didn’t, because we stop people coming from northern Italy and then the whole of Italy, we did the same for Iran and Japan and, early on, for Iran and japan and, earty on, from for Iran and Japan and, early on, from Wuhan and the whole of China. from Wuhan and the whola of China. when we from Wuhan and the whole of China. When we went from containment to when we went from containment to delay, when When we went from containment to delay, when the virus was already spreading through our communities, the scientists and the advice was to say, actually, there is almost no difference of actually doing anything at ports and airports. But now they are not advising you to introduce quarantine, are they? Or the advice now is, when infection rates are low and coming down even further, the risk from a spike from outside the UK is much higher, which is why we have introduced the quarantine. We’ve also introduced a review of it every three weeks so we make sure we are able to effectively, for example, and this has been talked about, look at other countries and build air bridges to save countries, and that is an important part of this. All of these decisions are really difficult but actually, when the virus is low and coming down even further, it’s the right thing to do to not allow peopla to right thing to do to not allow people to come in without quarantine. David. It’s got to be based on the science. The WHA set back in February, quarantine was back in Febmary, quarantine was generally back in February, quarantine was generally quarantined, Greece quarantine, Taiwan quarantined, New Zealand quarantined, we didn’t. 100,000 people came into the country 100,000 peopla came into the country in january 100,000 people came into the country inJanuary mocha in January mocha THEY SPEAK inJanuary mocha THEY SPEAK OVER in January mocha THEY SPEAK OVER EACH inJanuary mocha THEY SPEAK OVER EACH OTHER. Now we have a situation where we know 40,000 have died from Covid but, if you look at the year—on—year but, if you look at the year-on-year figures, its but, if you look at the year—on—year figures, its 60,000 people have lost figures, its 60,000 peopla have lost over this figures, its 60,000 people have lost over this period stop we have got the worst rate, in fact, we have a higher rate and the whole of Europe combined and now we are quarantining? This feels like late. We were late on the lockdown, late on the testing, late on the PPE and we are late again on quarantine. I would listen to you if you didn’t quote an inaccurate stat which was been proven to be wrong. If we used the same scale of measure is fame we would have reported only 20 deaths yesterday, and I’m sure the BBC at some point... Is there a country in Europe with a higher death rate than us? Every death is a regrettable thing. I us? Every death is a regrettable thing. lam not us? Every death is a regrettable thing. I am not sitting us? Every death is a regrettable thing. lam not sitting here us? Every death is a regrettable thing. I am not sitting here saying thing. lam not sitting here saying to you that thing. I am not sitting here saying to you that everything we have done we have done well but, at the end of this crisis, we will learn the lessons, because it’s only right we look at this, and we are trying to be as transparent as we can, but be as transparent as we ran, but it’s wrong to be as transparent as we can, but it’s wrong to quote figures that are completely spurious. Get a grip! We are languishing globally. We are a laughing stock. People have died. It’s horrendous. People can’t believe that Britain is so behind the curve globally, because we have been slow and dithering. It is disappointing you are making this a partisan point in the way care stammer has done desperate Keir Starmer. I want you to succeed because I don’t want more people to because I don’t want more peopla to die, but... Is because I don’t want more peopla to die, but... Isto because I don’t want more people to die, but... Is to then take away the inaccuracies and tell the truth and don’t quote the BBC, which were wrong last night, I hope they will correct it tonight. We are amongst numbers one, two and three in the world for global name 16 cadets. There is no doubt. Even if the figures come out slightly higher in other countries we will still be an outlier. And we have to learn the lessons. I am not proud of learn the lassons. I am not proud of that. We learn the lessons. I am not proud of that. We have to learn the lessons. The Prime Minister said he was proud of our record. Custom I’m not proud of the deaths. I’m proud of our record to stand out assisting system for a few thousand to 200,000 tests a day to day. I’m proud of the record of the NHS and the amazing front line workers who make sure the NHS never front line workers who make sure the NHS neverfailed or broke and continued to treat people. I am continued to treat peopla. I am proud of continued to treat people. I am proud of what we have done in the Treasury to make sure that businesses got the money they need to survive to make sure that 8.7 million peopla to survive to make sure that 8.7 million people get their wages today from the furlough scheme. I am proud of all of that. Donna, the question is about quarantine. Is it pointless now? It feels a bit late to me. I will say that, on the 8th of March, I had a trip booked to Italy and I didn’t go because I could see what was happening in Italy, but I could have gone and come back, and it was to Milan. And people from Italy to Milan. And peopla from Italy could to Milan. And people from Italy could come here first they were asked to self—isolate when they asked to self-isolate when they arrived asked to self—isolate when they arrived but they could arrive. I chose to lose the money from my ﬂight because chose to lose the money from my flight because it seemed pointless ﬂight because it seemed pointless to go and flight because it seemed pointless to go and contaminate and bring it back, but to go and contaminate and bring it back, butl to go and contaminate and bring it back, but I feel we were a bit late to get to it. However, we are where we are, and the important thing is that we do the right thing, so it isn’t about quarantine now, it’s about us complying with the standards, washing our hands, social distancing, doing the right things to protect ourselves from this vims. to protect ourselves from this virus. The virus hasn’t gone away. vims. The virus hasn’t gone away. It’s still virus. The virus hasn’t gone away. It’s still virulent, we can all It’s still virulant, we ran all still It’s still virulent, we can all still catch it and we are where we are. It’s a bit pointless, really, we look back in history, because we’ve had 40,000 deaths now and the only thing we ran we’ve had 40,000 deaths now and the only thing we can do is protect ourselves going forward, and that’s by complying with the science and the guidance that we have. I think that’s the important thing now. (lient that’s the important thing now. Client Lorraine wanted to come back (lient Lorraine wanted to come back in. (1ient Lorraine wanted to come back in. Seems Client Lorraine wanted to come back in. Seems to me that we have missed the boat and, if we are going to quarantine, why wait until Monday before we put it in place if it was so important? Basically, up until Monday, people could still come in, Monday, peopla could still come in, so what’s Monday, people could still come in, so what’s the point of it? Carrie. Thank you for letting me join the Thank you for [citing me join the I’ve got quite Thank you for letting me join the I’ve got quite an important point to make, as you were talking about stats and testing at R rate. We are specifically talking about quarantine. 0K, specifically talking about quarantine. OK, then I probably need to rewind a bit. I was trying to interject with David speaking I have Covid and I’ve tested negative twice and been told from my bloods that I have it, and there is a 30% failure have it, and there is a 3096 failure rate with have it, and there is a 30% failure rate with the swabs, so we are potentially missing 30 in 100 cases. So how potentially missing 30 in 100 cases. 50 how can we rely on those stats? So how ran we rely on those stats? where do So how can we rely on those stats? Where do we So how ran we rely on those stats? where do we go So how can we rely on those stats? Where do we go with that? I think we where do we go with that? I think we might come onto Where do we go with that? I think we might come onto testing later, so I’m going to hold that thought, if that’s all right. Thaddeus, you put your hand up. I was that’s all right. Thaddeus, you put your hand up. I wasjust wondering, your hand up. I was just wondering, in any one your hand up. I wasjust wondering, in any one country,... Would they let us travel there and travel back? We have higher infection rates any other country in Europe, but were talking about not letting them come talking about not latting them come when talking about not letting them come when it’s probably safer for talking about not letting them come when it’s probably saferfor them talking about not letting them come when it’s probably safer for them to come here and not quarantine that it is for us to go there and infect them. There are quite a few countries we can go to. Soon we can countries we ran go to. Soon we ran go to Italy to stop countries we can go to. Soon we can go to Italy to stop we can go to go to Italy to stop we ran go to Portugal now, go to Italy to stop we can go to Portugal now, I think, possibly other countries. Whew. it’s a bit other countries. whew. it’s a bit academic other countries. Whew. it’s a bit academic because many countries will not let us in because we have such a high rate of infection. Do you think we should have quarantine measures had to stop people coming in? 7 0h, had to yeah. stop peopla ' comlng in? 7 . . 0h, had to stop peopla coming in? ? Oh, yeah. The time to had to stop people coming in? 7 Oh, yeah. The time to do that is when we have a very low infection rate but it isn’t very low yet it is coming down very slowly. It is coming down more slowly than the press conference at Number Ten would like, the experts there and so on. Until it is down a lot further, then our it is down a lot further, than our residents it is down a lot further, then our residents will be welcomed in Italy and Spain and Greece and all these other countries. At the moment, I don’t think they will let us in because they have a better situation than us and they don’t want to import infection. It’s a bit early import infection. It’s a bit earty to be talking import infection. It’s a bit early to be talking about quarantine for its right to make a plan when we get to that happy point where we have the virus right down to low levels but at the moment I think one has to 55V but at the moment I think one has to say that it’s a pity this wasn’t done a long time ago, because my own view, and it’s only a guess because we don’t have the statistics published, is that we have lots of outbreaks in this country started off by people coming back from high incidence countries Italy particularly, and the virus going particularty, and the virus going under particularly, and the virus going under the radar and causing lots of infections, and changing in a subtle infections, and changing in a subtia way. We infections, and changing in a subtle way. We clearly don’t want that to way. We dearty don’t want that to happen in the way. We clearly don’t want that to happen in the future, so it’s a bit earty to be happen in the future, so it’s a bit early to be talking about that now because we still have this very high infection rate and we have to get it down before we can really get the down before we ran really get the quarantine down before we can really get the quarantine thing rolling. Its right to make a plan for it but whether it should come in on Monday or not, well, I should come in on Monday or not, well, Idon’t should come in on Monday or not, well, I don’t know. Hi. should come in on Monday or not, well, Idon’t know. Hi. If should come in on Monday or not, well, I don’t know. Hi. If the well, Idon’t know. Hi. Ifthe government well, I don’t know. Hi. If the government brings in regulations concerning quarantine, how effectively are they going to be able to actually enforce the quarantine? There is talk of one in five people being randomly checked, but that is probably not good enough. Does that mean they will be checked once every five days, the same person? Are the people in quarantine going to be allowed to go and shop and receive medical suppﬁes? and shop and receive medical supplies? I think realistically it’s unenforceable stop I think the suggestion is not quite as favourable as you are making it. I think it’s one in ten are expected to be checked by border officials. Let me ask you, Nadhim Zahawi. People are required to supply an address and a phone number. They can address and a phone number. They ran give you their address and a phone number. They can give you their mobile phone number, so I am wondering what the point of that is. If you give your mobile phone, you can be anywhere if someone rings and checks you are supposedly where you say you are. If suppos you edly where yo u 5.1 Y you a re . If supposedly where you say you are. If you go to Greece, you have to supply a landline number or you can’t get in. You have to fill in an online form with the address and phone number, and of course there is a fine if they don’t comply with the quarantine as well, but most people quarantine as well, but most peopla you will find, quarantine as well, but most people you will find, and before I became a politician I ran a research company, do the right thing. The reason we have done well is because the British people have done well and British peopla have done well and complied British people have done well and complied with the rules of social complied with the mics of social distancing, complied with the rules of social distancing, washing their hands... So you think a mobile number is adequate? Crop I think people will adequate? Crop I think peopla will do adequate? Crop I think people will do the right thing. If they are coming to this country and filling in a form and saying they will quarantine, they will do the right thing. We will keep this under review and continued to take tough decisions, because these are difficult, and we need people to work together. We can’t do this on our own. But we know, the evidence suggests that, when the incidence rate is low, we should try and make this work with our borders. Stick 3 this work with our borders. Stick a question from this work with our borders. Stick 3 question from Mike Golding. We are always told that we are following the science, but the government was science advisers who we watch daily on the update look and sound increasingly nervous about the early reduction in lockdown, before the UK Test and Trace is fully operational approval. Does the panel feel that we are easing lockdown to quickly and so risking more deaths, 3 second and so risking more deaths, a second wave of and so risking more deaths, 3 second wave of infection and, as a consequence, further untold increased damage to the UK economy Hugh, you don’t believe a second wave is likely at all, do you? Could you explain? I’m calling myself a you explain? I’m falling myself a second you explain? I’m calling myself a second wave sceptic because the idea of that is faced with what happened within Fraser in 1918, and I don’t think that’s a good model for the stop in 1918, we were think that’s a good model for the stop in 1918, we werejust think that’s a good model for the stop in 1918, we were just coming out of the First World War and the virus was very different virus that forced the second wave was very different it attacks different people stop it killed more American peopla stop it killed more American soldiers people stop it killed more American soldiers than the Germans did at end of the First World War, and we don’t even know the first wave virus was the same as the second and we don’t know if the third wave virus was the same as the second or first because the virus wasn’t discovered until 1933. What makes you think a second 1933. what makes you think a second wave 1933. What makes you think a second wave won’t happen with coronavirus, wave won’t happen with coronavims, given that we wave won’t happen with coronavirus, given that we are hearing from the WHO and so many countries that there are fears it will happen? I think what would happen, if we got a lot done wrong, it would not be a second wave. That is defined as the first wave goes away, then there is a gap when nothing happens and then the vims when nothing happens and then the virus takes off again. And that hasn’t happened. hasn’t happened. The big test is hasn’t happened. The big testis going to hasn’t happened. The big test is going to come in China, because China has released its citizens from lockdown and Sage, the advisory committee, has been confident that China will have a second wave. Time will tell whether it does or not. No sign yet. China is much more worried, and all the cases in China are imported from other countries. So I think are imported from other countries. 50 I think the second wave... I So I think the second wave... I can’t say it won’t happen but I think it’s unlikely to what will happen is what happened in Singapore, where they have very good controls. When the virus got into controls. when the virus got into these migrant controls. When the virus got into these migrant worker dormitories and took off, a bit like it took off and is still busy in our care homes, is still busy in our rare homes, because is still busy in our care homes, because these are very difficult places to have infection control. The vims places to have infection control. The virus will hang around and it won’t be a second wave, it will The virus will hang around and it won’t be a second wave, it willjust won’t be a second wave, it will just be the won’t be a second wave, it willjust be the continuation of outbreaks hither and thither. Those are the sort of noises coming from people sort of noises coming from peopla like sort of noises coming from people like Matt Hancock at the moment this is what we have to worry about this is what we have to stop without contact tracing. That will enable us contact tracing. That will enablc us to identify contact tracing. That will enable us to identify these outbreaks. This virus specialises in causing outbreaks and about half the cases outbreaks and about half the rases are in outbreaks and about half the cases are in outbreaks, not single cases. are in outbreaks, not singla cases. We are in outbreaks, not single cases. We need the system up and running We need the system up and mnning before We need the system up and running before we do any massive release of lockdown. I think what’s happened so far is essentially pretty trivial chipping away at the lockdown and we’ll see whether that has any effect on the R number and perhaps we ran effect on the R number and perhaps we can talk about that later as we ran talk about that later as well, how we can talk about that later as well, how much, how busy the virus is. Mike, you wanted to come back in? I think it is arbitrary, whatever you rail it, think it is arbitrary, whatever you call it, whether you call it a all it, whether you all it a second call it, whether you call it a second wave or an increase in infection. The point is, the R number, we know, is very close to one. It seems to me that the government’s messaging, some conscious, some unconscious, has led conscious, some unconscious, has lad towards quite conscious, some unconscious, has led towards quite significant increase in traffic and people on beaches and in traffic and peopla on beaches and peopla at in traffic and people on beaches and people at beauty spots. And for instance even protesting. You can instance even protesting. You ran see that instance even protesting. You can see that there are causes for concern. Does that make you anxious? Not for me personally, but it makes me anxious for people around me, for me anxious for peopla around me, for peopla who we me anxious for people around me, for people who we know in our area who peopla who we know in our area who are in people who we know in our area who are in the at risk group. I would say it would be going a bit far to 55V say it would be going a bit far to say it makes me anxious, but it certainly concerns me, I don’t want to end up going back into a lockdown. Let me ask the panel here. The thrust of the question is, is the lockdown being eased too early? the lockdown being eased too earty? At some point the lockdown being eased too early? At some point the lockdown has to be eased as we go into the recovery phase because we know that the lockdown is taking its toll and lives will be lost in terms of economics anyway. At some point it economic anyway. At some point it needs to economics anyway. At some point it needs to be eased. But my view is that actually we need to do it sensibly. We have got to come out of it sensibly, we have got to understand the rules and people need understand the mles and people need to follow understand the rules and people need to follow them. I would go back to saying, it depends on a really high compliance to the rules that are put compliance to the mles that are put out there. compliance to the rules that are put out there. Even if we continue with the lockdown, people are becoming the lockdown, peopla are becoming resﬂass the lockdown, people are becoming restless anyway, so we will have to resﬂass anyway, so we will have to do something restless anyway, so we will have to do something to mitigate that restlessness and make sure we come resﬂassness and make sure we come out of restlessness and make sure we come out of lockdown safely. Do you think now is the right time? I guess if we ran now is the right time? I guess if we can maintain some of the things, the ran maintain some of the things, the handmshing can maintain some of the things, the handwashing kills the virus, we know handmshing kills the virus, we know it is still handwashing kills the virus, we know it is still amongst us and there are steps we will have to take, we don’t know how long it is going to hang around, so we will have to live our lives very differently in terms of going forward. It will mean we will have to socially distance for a while longer. We will have to be whila longer. We will have to be more while longer. We will have to be more protective in the gear that we wear. Whether we do it now, next wear. whether we do it now, next week or wear. Whether we do it now, next week or two months’ time, we have to gradually come out, as long as we have a sensible rationale for the steps are taking. Annamarie. I was steps are taking. Annamaria. I was thinking along steps are taking. Annemarie. I was thinking along the same lines as Donna. A lot of the measures the government are bringing in at the moment, quarantine, wearing facemasks, social distancing, etc, all rely on people’s goodwill and the general public agreeing to these measures. I was the general public agreeing to these measures. I wasjust the general public agreeing to these measures. I was just wondering what the panel’s thoughts were on how can the panel’s thoughts were on how ran the government the panel’s thoughts were on how can the government actually try and improve public goodwill with regards to the introduction of track and trace apps? It is very clear that the public are getting a bit fed up at the moment and going out on beaches and clearly breaking a lot beaches and dearty breaking a lot of the beaches and clearly breaking a lot of the rules. Ben? I wanted to touch of the mles. Ben? I wanted to touch on something of the rules. Ben? I wanted to touch on something that Donna briefly mentioned. While Mike is right to mentioned. while Mike is right to 55V mentioned. while Mike is right to say it is mentioned. While Mike is right to say it is important we listen to the health experts, I think it is equally important that we listen to the economists. I think we are going to approach a point soon where the lives lost due to the economy being shut down lives lost due to the economy being shutdown exceed the lives lost because of the virus. I have heard because of the vims. I have heard stories because of the virus. I have heard stories about chemotherapy care stories about chemotherapy rare being stories about chemotherapy care being delayed, suicide and mental health wards are going up, and in schools, the deprived children who are falling behind because of school closures, universities closed and teaching isn’t being delivered. This will have effects for years to come and I think it is really time to start getting out of this lockdown now. David, coming back to my’s now. David, coming back to mrs original now. David, coming back to my’s original question, is the lockdown being eased too early? In part it is being eased too earty? In part it is because being eased too early? In part it is because track and trace is not up and mnning. I because track and trace is not up and running. Iwould because track and trace is not up and running. I would support and mnning. Iwould support relaxing the and running. I would support relaxing the lockdown but it has to be based on the science and clearly be based on the science and dearty we are be based on the science and clearly we are worried about the R number. You have got to sort out testing and you have got to make sure that peopla ran you have got to make sure that people can get access to a test in peopla ran get access to a test in 24 hours people can get access to a test in 2A hours and get the results and 2A 24 hours and get the results and 24 hours. You 2A hours and get the results and 2A hours. You have got to give local authorities the power to act quickly if there is a break—out in their if there is a break-out in their area. You if there is a break—out in their area. You have got to get to 50,000 human tracers and have an app that works that people have trust and confidence in. Some of the challenge is that confidence has been lost and the government has to move quickly to regain that confidence and also keep the messaging straightforward so people actually understand what so peopla actually understand what the so people actually understand what the rules are and what they have to the mles are and what they have to do. That the rules are and what they have to do. That was some of the concern about Boris’s announcement a few weeks ago because it about Boris’s announcement a few weeks ago because it was not clear and people did not understand it. and peopla did not understand it. Ollie, you and people did not understand it. Ollie, you have got your hand up. Yes, I Ollie, you have got your hand up. Yes, Ithink Ollie, you have got your hand up. Yes, I think the horse has bolted. I was on the protest in Southampton yesterday. There were a certain amount of people, a fair amount of amount of peopla, a fair amount of peopla wearing amount of people, a fair amount of people wearing masks, but an awful peopla wearing masks, but an awful lot that people wearing masks, but an awful lot that were not. And a lot of them were people like me. I think that one of the issues obviously coming back to the recent report that it is not even like there has been a cat not even like there has been a rat amongst the not even like there has been a cat amongst the pigeons. Your government have not been clear have not been clear enough on why we are affected more by COVID—19. Has are affected more by COVID-19. Has your are affected more by COVID—19. Has your government gone to Africa, for example, which has a better record than we have in the UK? Has your government gone to the countries with the origins where people are with the origins where peopla are more with the origins where people are more vulnerable? The horse has bolted and as a parent I would say the energy of the government now needs to go into mitigation because even with the track and testing I think a significant amount of people think a significant amount of peopla will not think a significant amount of people will not be interested and will not be listening. This is a fact and there needs to be energy put into how ran there needs to be energy put into how can we mitigate against the fact how ran we mitigate against the fact that people how can we mitigate against the fact that people are now not listening? that peopla are now not listening? Flora. that people are now not listening? Flora. Touching on Ben’s point about the economy, I think maybe the conversation around that needs to be focused more on the inequalities that arise. There are studies that suggest mortality rate improves in situations of economic crises, but you really need to be focusing on how we need to try and reduce the inequalities that will be arising there. Secondly, we have seen the trust in government absolutely plummet ever since the Prime Minister’s special adviser broke his own lockdown rules, and yet the own lockdown mles, and yet the trust in own lockdown rules, and yet the trust in scientists like Chris whitty is trust in scientists like Chris Whitty is incredibly high and I was whitty is incredibly high and I was wondering Whitty is incredibly high and I was wondering whether we should discuss whether the scientists should have more influence in the policies that more inﬂuence in the policies that are being more influence in the policies that are being made rather than acting as an advisory group. Lorraine? One of the things they produced on the lockdown was allowing people to lockdown was allowing peopla to travel long lockdown was allowing people to travel long distances, any distance, to exercise. Of course all the south—west where we had really low south-west where we had really low infection south—west where we had really low infection rates has been invaded from hordes of people coming to the beaches and the beauty spots, who come from areas of the UK that have very high rates, and yet the government have not addressed that. Nadhim Cumming coming to my’s Nadhim Cumming coming to mrs question, is Nadhim Cumming coming to my’s question, is the lockdown being eased too quickly before track and trace is fully operational and proven? Are we risking more deaths? First of all, we have been deliberately slow, baby steps. Initially there was a huge pressure on the Prime Minister to open all nonessential retail by the lst of nonessential retail by the 1st of june and the nonessential retail by the ist of June and the Prime nonessential retail by the 1st of June and the Prime Minister said, june and the Prime Minister said, no, we will June and the Prime Minister said, no, we will look at car showrooms no, we will look at far showrooms and no, we will look at car showrooms and outdoor markets and if we continue to bear down on the R number, by the 15th of continue to bear down on the R number, by the 15th ofJune we will number, by the 15th of june we will open up number, by the 15th ofJune we will open up nonessential retail. I am the business and industry minister and I have been working on all the different guidelines for different environments of work, outdoor, indoor, construction and retail. We indoor, constmction and retail. We have got task indoor, construction and retail. We have got task forces led by ministers, looking at pubs and restaurants, places of worship, theatres, salons, for example, all the difficult areas of work. We are doing all of that work at the same time. Track and trace, the pilot that we ran in the Isle of Wight, one of the important findings of that is that people said the first that is that peopla said the first contact that is that people said the first contact they want is with a human being, which is why we have recruited 25,000 people who can deal recruited 25,000 peopla who ran deal with recruited 25,000 people who can deal with about 10,000 cases... When are with about 10,000 cases... when are we going to get with about 10,000 cases... When are we going to get figures because it has been a week now since track and trace was launched? We have had some trace was hunched? We have had some figures that were trace was launched? We have had some figures that were leaked to Channel 4 News, which suggested very few people have been contacted. When are people have been contacted. when are we going to get people have been contacted. When are we going to get figures? A very good question and we are working ﬂat out to make sure we get question and we are working flat out to make sure we get the figures right. The other question that links to your question is the figures have to be robust and accurate, which is what the statisticians have asked us. You want to make sure that the statistis us. You want to make sure that the statistics authority does not criticise you? We want to make sure the figures we are releasing are accurate and to get them right because people are being tracked and traced and tested in different modes, whether through going to a physical point... When will we get physical point... when will we get them? physical point... When will we get them? When we think they are robust them? when we think they are robust we will them? When we think they are robust we will start issuing the figures and make sure that the app is then and make sure that the app is than fully rolled out and make sure that the app is then fully rolled out nationally. We are also asking local authorities to also asking [oral authorities to have a also asking local authorities to have a local plan ready. For the have a [oral plan ready. For the first time, have a local plan ready. For the first time, and this is really important, Mike, in terms of your question, it is about confidence. The first time when the track and trace system is fully operational we will be ahead of the virus, not behind it. If there is a spike in Wimbledon or in Stratford—upon—Avon, Wimbladon or in Stratford-upon-Avon, we will be Wimbledon or in Stratford—upon—Avon, we will be ahead of it and that way we ran we will be ahead of it and that way we can react very quickly with the we ran react very quickly with the [oral we can react very quickly with the local authority to control the virus [oral authority to control the virus in the local authority to control the virus in the area so we do not have to dose in the area so we do not have to close down the whole country as we close down the whola country as we and close down the whole country as we and other countries have been doing because the pandemic has been spreading so quickly around the world. We have got very little time left. When will we get to 50,000 left. when will we get to 50,000 traces? left. When will we get to 50,000 traces? When will the app to be traces? when will the app to be ready? We traces? When will the app to be ready? We are working ﬂat out, we want to make sure it does everything it needs to do and it will be in place this month. I cannot give you place this month. I rannot give you an exact place this month. I cannot give you an exact date. It will be in place this month? Let me be clear, the app will be up and running this month? will be up and mnning this month? It was mnning in will be up and running this month? It was running in the Isle of Wight It was mnning in the Isla of Night and we It was running in the Isle of Wight and we will make sure it will be run and we will make sure it will be nm as soon as and we will make sure it will be run as soon as we think it is robust. It will be in place this month? It will be rolled out across the UK this month? I would like to think we can month? I would like to think we ran do it by this month? I would like to think we can do it by this month, yes. We will get you back. We are out of time. We could have carried on for quite some time. Thank you very much to the panel and thank you very much to Hugh for panel and thank you very much to Hugh forjoining us down the line Hugh for joining us down the line from Hugh forjoining us down the line from Aberdeen. Thank you very much to our panel from Southampton this week. Next week we will have a virtual audience from Cardiff and the week after virtual audience from Cardiff and the week afterfrom virtual audience from Cardiff and the week after from Plymouth. Contact us in the usual way and we will get back to you and we will see if we ran get will get back to you and we will see if we can get you on the programme. if we ran get you on the programme. If you want to if we can get you on the programme. If you want to carry on the discussion, you can If you want to carry on the discussion, you canjoin Adrian discussion, you ranjoin Adrian Childs discussion, you canjoin Adrian Childs and guests on Question Time Extra Time now. But thank you to all of you for watching.