Tonight, we are in Oxford. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Brandon Lewis, the Government’s Security Minister and deputy for exiting the EU and no—deal preparations. Labour’s Shadow Treasury Minister and a candidate in the race to be leader of the Labour Party, Clive Lewis. Anne McElvoy, senior editor at the Economist, and broadcaster. Miatta Fahnbulleh, economist and chief executive of the left—of—centre think—tank, New Economics Foundation. And author, military historian and former editor in chief of the Daily Telegraph, Max Hastings. Welcome to our panel, to our audience at home and all of you here. You can argue along in the usual way using the hashtag on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. It’s a new year, let’s kick off with our first question from Rosie Parry. Is Harry and Meghan’s decision to step back as senior royals petulant and ill—judged? Right, that was a comment in the Times, petty and ill—judged, in their editorial today. Megxit, as it has been dubbed now, inevitably. Clive Lewis, where do you stand? No, it isn’t. First of all I would say about Meghan Markle, she has been a breath of fresh air for our monarchy. She has been a role model, inspirational, herwork with charities, in particular with the victims of Grenfell, has been outstanding. I think the way she has been treated by our media is little short of disgraceful. In what in particular? I think Prince Harry himself has said himself that he thinks there is a large degree of racism in terms of how she has been treated. It has been quite appalling. He pointed to what happened in South Africa with the tour and the royal correspondents reporting, and he also said something about the fact that sometimes what is being said is so far from the truth, but because it has come from royal correspondents, it has been repeated around the world. Anybody in the public eye in this country knows that happens far too often in our media. He said royal correspondents’ reporting would get misreported. It would get misreported, but they were basing it on what was said by those royal correspondents. Let’s be clear and frank here, I think it’s up to them in the 21st century, if they wish to step back from their royal duties. I think, given what it has done to them, given the pressure and stress, if you have ever been in the public eye and the eye of a media storm, let’s not forget that Prince Harry’s mother was harassed severely, Princess Diana, by the media. He has seen this before and it has had a massive impact on his life and now it is happening to his wife. He has every right, and she has every right, to step back from public life and do as they see fit. I also think as well, Meghan Markle is one of the most privileged people in this country. And yet, look at what our media is doing to her and Prince Harry. It is completely unacceptable. I think they have every right to make the decision they have. Is itjust the media that is making them do this? Looking through their website today, they explained their reasoning, in some detail, they want to live a different kind of life as well. Yes, they do, but we have to take into account that this probably wouldn’t happen, and it is speculation on my part, but this probably wouldn’t have happened if there hadn’t been such a negative coverage from the British media. This is the same British media that is meant to be the fourth estate, meant to hold power and the public to account. It is meant to be fair and balanced. It is anything but. I think what you can see in the way she has been treated as a member of the royal family is little short of a disgrace, as far as I am concerned, and I think they have every right to do what they have done. As for the issue of warning Her Majesty about this, I personally feel that’s a family matter between them. I understand Her Majesty might be upset about that, but ultimately, it’s a family matter and I don’t think I would want to delve into that. Max? I agree with about half of what Clive said. I think Meghan Markle and Prince Harry deserve tremendous sympathy, because it is hell being royal, it is incredibly difficult being royal. I don’t buy the view that it is all racist. You mentioned Diana. I was a newspaper editor at the time that Diana was in the eye of the storm. An awful lot of royals have had a very bad time, you can argue, from the media, without the issue of race being brought into it. The question, Max, is was their decision petulant and ill—judged? I also feel very sorry for the Queen in all this. She is in her 905 and now facing more of these family storms. I think one of the problems that... perhaps cos she has lived to such a great age, nobody has got to grips with the issue of what is the royal family supposed to be. The idea... Prince Charles is dead right to talk about a slimmed—down royal family, in which the state is not expected to pay 2.4 million for Prince Harry’s house, in which there is a clear understanding of what is and isn’t expected of lesser royals. We are all arguing all the time and I think they are the victims of this in some degree, because nobody has told them explicitlyjust what is and is not expected of them, so they deserve sympathy, but Prince Charles, William and the Queen deserve sympathy in all this. But I hope they will keep talking. There is obviously a hell of a row going on in that family and the worst thing that could happen is if they end up non—speakers. They’ve got to keep talking and see a way through this. One hopes it will be a happy one, not only for Meghan and Prince Harry, but also for the Queen and the future of the monarchy, which some of us care passionately about. The man in the check shirt. Would their financial... their seeking financial independence not have been better before the multi—million—pound renovation of Frogmore Cottage? Yes, they are talking about living financially independently. Let’s just take another question at the front. With the sweater. .. I am perfectly happy to see them live their own life, do whatever they want. They are humans, like we all are. But shouldn’t they immediately stop taking public money as they step down? Instead of, I think they said today, "move towards that". Yes, they have said they will work to become financially independent. Who pays for the royals? Certainly, in terms of security, that comes underyouraegis, Brandon. Yes. Are you happy, if they step back from their role as senior members of the royalfamily, will you keep paying for their security? I’m sure you are not surprised that I can’t comment on the security... You are Security Minister. It’s inappropriate for me to comment on security issues for any protected person, royalfamily or otherwise protected. Surely you can tell us whether you would be happy to keep funding it? No, all protection for the royal family is done on a risk—assessed basis, independently. It does come within my remit, but it would be inappropriate for me to comment on how we arrange, and what we do for security for protected people. What I would say, and I think this is where there is an element of agreement between Clive and Max and myself, I agree with what Clive pointed out at the beginning. Harry and Meghan, and the royalfamily generally, do amazing work for the country and particularly for charity and good causes. We are very lucky, and I’m proud to be in a country that has a royal family like that. But Max is also right, this is a matterfor the royalfamily, and I hope we end up in a position where the royal family get a result that is good for them and good for the country. One thing we have seen through the history of our country is the royal family has evolved over the centuries and over the generations, to reflect the country, and I am sure we’ll continue to see that, but this is a matter for the royal family. Can you see a situation where Harry and Meghan live independently but are still part of the royal family? Some would see that as a contradiction in terms. Can you see that working? We will have to wait and see exactly what the royal family want to do and where they will go with this. I think it’s difficult to prejudge what they might do. We should also be clear that the royal family is notjust funded through the public purse. They have funding through the family itself and their own interests. Anne, I saw you shaking your head in some frustration when Clive was talking. A little bit. Let me with the position of the Sussexes. It depends on whether their aim is still to be in the royal family or not. They said they don’t want to be senior royals, but that is a somewhat different question. They say they want to continue to collaborate with the Queen and support royal charities. It’s not picking off some menu. That’s the slight problem. You have a model of the royal family, and I do think a slimmed—down royal family is where we need to head. I think Prince Charles was right about that. That is now happening by necessity, not by choice. The question is then, what is the role of those who, if you like, are in the outer core? They are an attractive couple who have brought a breath of fresh air to the royalfamily. I interviewed Meghan Markle, in a panel of other people, last year. Ifound her very engaging, professional to work with, I liked her focus on subjects like girls’ education worldwide. I liked the fact she had an international dynamic to what she brought to it. But you can do a lot of that from a different platform. If you want to stay somehow connected to the royalfamily, being a semi—demi—royal, with a bit of time at Frogmore Cottage, and a lot of it in North America, is going to be very difficult to pull off. It will need to be very strategic. Max Hastings said rightly that it needs to be done by agreement. It can’t be done by an exchange of hostile communications, as we have had in the last day or so. So, something’s gone badly wrong. It may be salvageable, but it does needs thinking through. The reason I disagree with Clive... We talk about the media and poor coverage — yes, it must be very bruising to get coverage you don’t like — sometimes, that even happens to politicians. MAX: Can I mention... Max, what I was about to say, I think most coverage, including the broadcasters, is very, very positive in the UK. We often don’t report a lot of things people say when they don’t like the royals. I think you have to calibrate it and they have to roll with that, if they want to still be connected to the firm. One short, brutal point about money. One issue that will face the Sussexes if they do step down, they will find an awful lot of people, especially in North America, who want to give them money, but they are absolutely the worst sort of people, and probably most of them, they should not be taking money from. And this issue... You mean in terms of commercial endorsements? Whether it’s lending them yachts, all the people who are most eager to hang around royals are almost, ipso facto, the people who the royals shouldn’t be hanging around with. How they overcome that problem will be very difficult for them. Miatta, one thing that occurs to me, this idea of growing financial independence. We have seen that before, thinking of the Count and Countess of Wessex, with the TV production company, the PR company, and in the end, the Queen ended up giving them money so they wouldn’t do that any longer. Can you see that working? I think you can see it working. It’s a question of imagination and will. At the end of the day, for me, I have a lot of sympathy for Harry and Meghan. I think they have been given a really rough ride. You just have to look at some of the coverage overnight around their decision, which has been really vile and excessive, to see that actually, it’s been hugely unfair. I think, in part, it’s because Meghan doesn’t conform to what people, some people, expect a royal should look like and act like, and so she has been given a really tough time. I think it’s wrong and really sad. And so, I think, they are a young family, they have literallyjust had a baby, that’s pretty tough in its own right. They are under a huge amount of pressure and they have been really honest about how unhappy they are, about mental health issues they are struggling with, and they have had a break and decided, "We want to change things. "We want to focus on ourselves and our kid." And I think they are completely right, and I say fair play to that. But I do think it shines a spotlight yet again on the royal family, on the monarchy, and I think that the monarchy, who are part of our culture, our tradition, our history, but it needs to be reformed and it needs to be brought back into the 21st century. For me, that means both constitutional reform, so we are no longer a nation of subjects, but a nation of citizens, through to the fact it needs to be scaled down so there are less royals, and the fact that we have this very privileged and very wealthy family that should be financially independent, but also, actually, wealth that they have accumulated through centuries, that they have inherited, they should be giving some of it back to the public, because in the end, it belongs to us. Three hands up in the front. Yes, the woman in the cardigan first, then I’ll come to you, sir. Isn’t the truth of the matter that everybody now looks on the monarchy as a bargain, and unless we get our pound of flesh from the press, and in terms of how much money they bring into the country, nobody actually believes that that family should be allowed to rule the country as right? We all look at it as a transactional arrangement now. And do you think we are wrong to do that? No... Well, in a way, Ithink we are wrong, but also, the transaction is in terms of, how many stories will they give to the press? The press turned on Meghan when she stopped providing so many photo opportunities for the baby. Very quickly, they turned on her. I think we like to see a soap opera, we like to be provided with entertainment, and if we don’t get that entertainment, the country only is governed by our agreement, and we feel we have to get value from them as entertainment, as well as money being brought into the country. The royal family have provided acres of coverage, in the last couple of months in particular. Yes, the man in the yellow shirt. I’m inclined to agree with Max, actually. My sympathy goes to Her Majesty. In the last year, she had to put up with what happened to Prince Andrew, and... That can’t have been a good day... It’s a tough time for her. 2019 has been a very tough time. And her husband was in hospital. And now this breaking news about her grandson. I think what Harry should have done, he should have come back from his holiday, from America and Canada, taken his time, perhaps gone to the Queen... He did go to Her Majesty when he decided to marry Meghan. He did ask her and she gave consent. What he should have done is gone to Windsor Castle or Buckingham Palace, had a chat with his grandmother and then discussed what his intentions were, so that all the protocol could be followed and then he could have had a press release. But he pre-empted and went and gave a press release. There are reports tonight, I cannot verify one way or the other, that the Queen was aware to some extent of what was going to be announced today. We just don’t know, do we? I do agree with Clive, the British media have literally tortured them. He is frightened. He has seen what his mum went through and he doesn’t want his wife to go through that. So he’s made that decision, which I think is too pre—empted and too early. The man here in the cap. Yes, I admire them for having the courage to come out and say what they have said and what they wish for. I have adult children with families, and if I started to try to tell them what to do, I think I would be out of order. And they would, also. And also, the question of Frogmore, if they didn’t occupy that, perhaps they would give it to the homeless. Right, fair enough. Can Ijust ask, out of interest, is there anyone in the audience who thinks that Harry and Meghan have done the wrong thing? Not a single hand up. That’s really interesting. I had no idea how this conversation would go. That’s very interesting indeed. OK, I am going to move on to another subject, if I may. Eric Eimerson. Yes? Has the assassination of Qasem Soleimani, on the orders of President Trump, made the world a safer or a more dangerous place? Of course, we have the reports tonight, we had the Canadian Prime Minister, who was talking just before we came on air, confirming US reports that... Well, they believe they have the information — Brandon, you ran fill us in on this - that the Ukrainian passenger jet that was downed just hours after the missiles went into the US air bases, following the assassination of Soleimani, that this jet was downed by the Iranians by mistake. We can’t verify that, but perhaps you ran tell us more? Er, yes. Well, Justin Trudeau’s made an announcement as we came on air and what we believe has happened, what the Canadians have outlined, is it looks like the plane was brought down by an surface—to—air missile. We believe it was... Have you seen intelligence to that effect? We believe it was unintentional. I’m not going to... I’ve just outlined what... At some point, I’m going to ask you a question you can actually answer! Have you seen intelligence to that effect? Yes or no? So I’ve just watched Justin Trudeau outline the position. But can you answer that question? I’m not going to talk about the intelligence, obviously. 0K, all right. Fair enough. It would be inappropriate. But what I can say is we do believe the pointJustin Trudeau has outlined, which is that a surface—to—air missile has hit that plane. We believe it was unintentional. We do... We’ll be working with our Canadian colleagues, and the Prime Minister’s spoken to our partners around the world, including in the EU, with President Macron and Angela Merkel, supporting them in the work they’re doing to ensure that we get a full investigation to get to the bottom of what has actually happened and how it came about. And obviously our thoughts go out to all the family and friends of people who have been affected by such a tragic loss of life. It’s beyond words, to consider what people are going through in that situation, to make sure there is proper and respectful repatriation of the remains of people to their home countries and to their friends and families. And do you think... Coming back to Eric’s question. Ijust wanted to fill us in, Eric, forgive me, given that this just happened before we came on air. Do you think the killing of Qasem Soleimani has made the world a safer or more dangerous place? Well, I think the reality is, particularly in that part of the world... We have challenges in parts the world, and that is a part of the world that has been and is a dangerous place. We all want to see a de—escalation of this situation. Globally, it is in nobody’s interests to see anything other than de—escalation. We will be... As I say, we want to work with our partners around making sure there’s a good and proper investigation. We’re working with partners around the world to make sure we do everything we ran to play our part in seeing that de—escalation. The Prime Minister spoke to Rouhani just this morning as well. But is it more dangerous now, do you think? I think we’re going to have to see what happens over the next few days, but this is a dangerous part of the world, and we are in dangerous times. That’s why it’s important that everybody is working together to see a de—escalation of this situation. That’s what’s in the best interests of all countries involved. Miatta? Yes, it has made it more dangerous. And, yes... Of course it has. Look, Soleimani clearly terrorised people in his own country and beyond. He clearly took action that was destabilising in the region, but none of that excuses the action of the President of the United States. You know, what Trump has done is the thing that neither Bush or Obama... Theirjudgment was it was the wrong thing to do, to try to take out Soleimani, because it would be highly risky that it would escalate things and it would destabilise the region. And, you know, you can’t help but feel that this is yet another example of Trump being cavalier, reckless, thoughtless and impulsive, and it’s put all of us in danger, and critically, it’s put people in the Middle East in danger. And for me, you know, the scenes of people in the streets in Iran gives you the sense of the kind of depth of feeling and anger, particularly against the backdrop of, like, really crippling sanctions that the US has imposed on Iran, that means that there’s food shortages in the country, medical shortages in the country. The IMF said that last year, the Iranian economy shrunk by 9.5%. So people are angry and, you know, Trump has done thejob of uniting the Iranian people against America. So it’s hugely dangerous. Not least because, you know, for me, I can’t see what the end goal is for him, I can’t see what the strategy is, and I don’t think there is one. So I think for the UK Government, you’ve got to play this and not hug the United States closely on this. And, you know, some of the kind of rhetoric that’s come from the Government — "We understand where they’re coming from. "We’re on the same page as them" — I think is a mistake. Because, you know, if you want to play the role you say you do, of de—escalating, if you want to play the role of trying to broker dialogue, then the UK has to be seen and has to be strong and independent of the US, and be willing to tell our closest allies when they’re being reckless, that they ARE being reckless and putting at risk hundreds of thousands of men, women and children in the Middle East, as well as potentially people at home. Just very briefly, Brandon, as I’ve got you here, I’ll put you on the spot — do you think it was reckless? I think the Americans have an absolute right to defend themselves. We don’t know exactly what the information was they had. They made a decision. I know this is the Government line that’s come out, but do you think it was reckless? The reality is, this is a man who... It doesn’t excuse it. You know, we don’t mourn his loss, but has been involved himself in a huge amount of loss of life in that part of the world. And I think it is right that we respect the fact that the United States has the right to defend themselves, but our aim and our purpose is to see a de—escalation in that region. Yes, the woman here in the front. Surely you wouldn’t have to worry about changing... or de—escalating if we didn’t have a rogue president going around doing these things so recklessly, and just coming back to the narrative around this, whilst I’m not going to dispute the wrongs that Soleimani did, he was also one of the leaders that led the rebellions against Isis. So I think there’s a question mark over just the recklessness with which this has been carried out. 0K. The woman at the back, in the red top. My understanding is BorisJohnson made this decision without informing you... Oh, sorry, my apologies — that Donald Trump made this decision without informing you, or BorisJohnson or Dominic Raab, that you were cut out of the loop in terms of this major political change. So the British response has been closer to the French and German one, to the point that we are criticised by Mike Pompeo for not being as helpful as we could be. It seems that we are much closer aligned with France and Germany and the EU response — how is this going to change how you move forward in terms of making Brexit happen when one of our close trading partners that we hope for in the future — the Americans — seem to be cutting us out of the loop of major political decisions? I’ll come back to you on that in a moment, if I may, Brandon. Just there’s a lot of hands up. Yes, the man in the brown sweater? So I think you briefly touched on Britain’s role, so my kind of question I’d be interested in hearing to tie in with all this is, what do you see Britain’s role in the Middle East is going forward? What is your opinion of our position? 0K. And this man in another brown sweater. Back there, yes. Would it help or hinder the situation if we follow Donald Trump’s advice and withdraw from the Iran nuclear agreement? 0K. Brandon, there’s a few things you will need to answer. I’m going to go around the rest of the panel first, if I may? (live. I think if you’re going to have... ..a society, a state and an international community that’s going to live by the rule of international law, especially the laws that you yourself have played a big part in writing, then you need to stick by them. And it looks to me that at the moment, on the evidence that hasn’t been supplied, this looks to me very much that this is not abiding by international law. It’s actually looking very much like a state—level assassination. APPLAUSE And can I ask you, given that you saw active service in Afghanistan, what’s your view in terms of — coming back to Eric’s question — this killing making the world a safer or more dangerous place? Well, I think you only have to... I think if you spoke to the families and friends of the victims of that disaster that happened to the aircraft, then I think you will already have your answer. I don’t think we have to wait and see, as Brandon says — we already have our answer. The world is a more dangerous place as a result of this. Let’s not forget, we’ve had our own share of intervention in this part of the world, in the Middle East. I know it’s Persia, but this neck of the woods, and Iraq, which is the next—door neighbour. I think if you look at the people in Iraq and Iran, I was seeing thousands of people on the street, pleading with their government, pleading with Iran, pleading with the United States, and after 20 years of war, of destabilisation, of hundreds of thousands of people dead, in which our country has played a part in the past, along with the US and our allies, I think now to start to escalate again and risk the threat of war... Which is something, if you’ve seen it up close, you would never wish on anyone. There are generations in Iraq who have been completely wiped out by what’s happened there. And I think for Donald Trump to act the way he has, to bring the Wild West to the Middle East, then I think, ultimately, we have a rogue president who is destabilising, I think, global and international relations in an area which is extremely dangerous, just before he’s about to be impeached, just before an election. It’s cynical, it looks wrong. And where is the Government? On the first political test of foreign policy since they won the general election, and are now taking us out of the European Union, they have fallen at the first hurdle. Because ultimately, what is happening here... We expected to see the British Government and Boris Johnson come out and stand up for the rule of law, and he has failed. We haven’t even seen him in Parliament — he’s still on the private island of Mustique, as far as I know, texting his responses. It’s completely unacceptable. Other than, obviously, being at Prime Minister’s Questions? Well, I know. Thought I’d get a little joke in there about Mustique. Well, just in case anyone took you literally! Max? The question I ask, what would we be saying if President Putin had used a Russian drone to take out a Western client in this way? I think opinion would be deeply... APPLAUSE I wouldn’t use the rhetoric that Clive has used, but I don’t disagree with the fundamental. Yes, it has made the world a more dangerous place. There is no... I read American media every day and I haven’t seen, anywhere in the American media, any suggestion there is any strategy or any policy behind this. This was just a lunge by the President, and where I totally agree with Miatta and with Clive — I don’t think you can expect a British Prime Minister to make anything other than sympathetic or respectful noises to the United States in the House of Commons, as BorisJohnson did yesterday. But I think it will be a key test, if we get a new escalation of the Iran situation, which is highly likely in the months ahead, and if President Trump seems determined to pursue this course, I think it is vital BorisJohnson displays the courage to say that we will have no part of direct military action against Iran. And I think that will be a vital test for this government. We’ve seen enough. We are all deeply scorched about the memory of 2003, everything that is happening in Iraq today derived from that, and any suggestion that we should now get involved in direct military action, just to keep the... First of all, the Americans... So many British Prime Ministers since 1941 have done things in hopes of payback from the Americans. We have a good working relationship with the United States on many issues, but there is never any payback for our support for them. But again and again, we’ve been weak enough to support mistaken American foreign policy initiatives and we’ve got absolutely nothing out of it, and this is a good moment to say, "No more." APPLAUSE Anne? I’m just slightly staggered to find that Max Hastings has turned into a sort ofJeremy Corbyn! No—one more surprised than Max, I suspect. LAUGHTER Well, that speech could have come from that direction. The one thing I think is a bit missing so far, so I’m going to focus in on it — everyone sort of gave the General Soleimani and the Iranian position a bit of a free pass. I think it’s very hard, because President Trump makes it very hard to say, "Here is someone we ran rely on to keep us safe." That was the question. Yes, we know he’s reckless. Yes, we know that it is hard to find a strategic way through Donald Trump’s thinking. But our interests, America’s interests, the West’s interests also will go on long after Donald Trump. And one of the things I think we’ve gone past rather fast is we would need some response to what had become a spiral of aggression across the Middle East from Iran, sponsored by the likes of General Soleimani, and very largely by him. This was not something that started... I think the lady in front mentioned Iraq. It goes back way before Iraq — it goes back to 1979 and the aftermath of that, and a strong Islamist Shia push to make "many Irans", as I think the rhetoric is from that quarter in Tehran. I’ve been very pleased to see that the response... There are other forces in Tehran who I think want to balance it out. But I don’t think it was just going to go on without any response. Clive goes the legal route — it’s a perfectly decent and correct question, but it’s not the only question in international affairs. It’s not the only question if you want to keep your own country safe and keep a global order, which is incredibly difficult and changeable and risky. And it is like that with and without Donald Trump. What I’d like to see, of course, from us, seeing as we’re sitting here in Britain... You asked what the British response would be. I can tell you, from my personal knowledge, that many senior Americans, including some in uniform, are as appalled by the President’s handling of foreign policy and military affairs as we are. I don’t dispute that for a moment, Max. There was a very senior American who telephoned a very senior British official, just after he left the Trump administration. He was one of the most senior former members of the Trump administration, And he told his British friend, "I owe you this call because we work closely together, "and I want to tell you that you should be in no doubt, "however many state visits you do, "however often you have Trump to Buckingham Palace, "this this American government does not do allies, "it does not do partners. "Expect nothing from this administration." And this is where we are. Well, I don’t think you’re right about that. I think you pursue... You ask... Very good questions from the audience — what should we do? We pursue de—escalation, we stay close to our more robust European allies, who I think also know there is also a major problem about Iran, there is not only a major problem with Donald Trump. And no, you don’t get involved in anything like... You know, we’ve talked about a military intervention, side—saddled with the US. No, I would not support that either. You calibrate your response. But you don’tjust go around saying, "This is another example of a mad US president doing another mad thing." It’s not enough, and it won’t see you through the next few difficult years and the really difficult choices that lie ahead of us. 0K. There’s a lot of people sitting patiently with their hands up. Yes, the woman in the blue scarf there. Yes, I agree with Anne, because I think that we might be misleading ourselves to say that Trump isjust a rogue president when, in fact, he probably has quite a bit of backing in the US. There are quite a few Americans who really support his actions. I’m not as well—connected as Max, obviously, but I think it strikes me that we often like to look at the people who support us and say, "Oh, they disagree and he’s rogue," but, in fact, is he rogue? Is he not accepting advice? I don’t agree with his actions myself, but I think we might mislead ourselves to continue to call him this rogue president acting on his own. Brandon, let’s come back to you, cos there were a number of points raised that only you can answer, and one in particular about Britain’s relationship with America, and how much Britain calibrates its support of actions like this in the hope of getting a trade deal, or whatever it might be. And then of course we heard what Max had to say, which is, you know, that’s for the birds. Well, look, turning to the lady’s point... I can’t remember if it was the lady or one of the gentlemen that made the point about the Iran nuclear agreement. Our position is, as I said, this is a... You know, we do live in dangerous times, this is a dangerous part of the world — that’s why we want to see de—escalation, we want to see the parties fulfilling that nuclear agreement — the Iranian deal, as it’s commonly called. In terms of the lady’s point specifically about our partners, I think this is actually... And I have to say, if we were going to get onto Brexit, I didn’t expect to do it in the context of THIS question. You never know what’s going to happen on Question Time! Absolutely. On a serious note, I think this is actually a... What you have outlined is a very good example of the point that I think is quite important to remember — that we are leaving the EU, we are not leaving Europe. We want to be an important partner and friend with countries that we work closely with. The Prime Minister, as I said earlier on, has spoken to President Macron and to Angela Merkel, the Chancellor, already. We want to work with them, playing our part in de—escalating this, and that response. That doesn’t preclude us from doing a very good trade deal, either with them as part of the EU, or with our friends and partners in the United States. The special relationship between our countries has always gone well beyond a relationship between a prime minister and a president. It’s a relationship built on security and history as well. and I do believe, actually, that we can do a trade deal with the United States. And I know that they are. .. Donald Trump has thrown some cold water over that, saying the withdrawal agreement at the moment is precluding a trade deal with America. I have talked to people in Washington with the Trade Department recently. Liz Truss, the Secretary of State, has spoken to her counterparts regularly and recently and they are keen to do a trade deal with us and I think that’s in the best interests of the economy of both our countries, as well as doing a trade deal with friends and partners in the EU. I don’t think one precludes the other. We want to see both happen. 0K. We have a number of other questions to get through. Before I move on, I want to tell you that next week we will be in Liverpool and the week after that we are in Stoke Newington in north—east London. If you want to be in the audience, you ran all us or go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions and join the conversation. Let’s move on to Rochelle Silva. Should the Labour Party make a clean breakfrom Corbynism? APPLAUSE Clive Lewis, I will come to you in a minute. I’ll start with Miatta. 0K! Look, I don’t think you can experience a defeat of the size the Labour Party did in December and not change, and not do things differently, and just continue doing what you are doing and hope for the best. So, I think the labour Party needs to reach out, notjust to its traditional heartlands, but beyond that and speak to people. To understand why people moved away from it — in this election, but also in the last three or four elections, because this is a longer term problem for the Labour Party. And based on that, decide what the change looks like. The thing I would say, I think one of the things Labour got right was to say, to look at the country, look at the scale of some of the challenges we face — so the climate emergency, the fact our economy is not working for everyone. We have had a decade where living standards have been squeezed, so people today are no better off than they were ten years ago. That is unprecedented in modern times. To see the crisis in our public services and say enough is enough. We need to do something different. We need ambitious, bold policies to transform the economy. My plea to all the leadership contenders is, don’t retreat from that ground. The job is to deliver an ambitious prospectus for change, but a clear plan, and to convince the country you have a plan to deliver that. I think in doing that... But have you answered the question, Miatta? Should the Labour Party make a clean breakfrom Corbynism? I’m not sure what your answer is. I don’t really know what Corbynism is, quite frankly. What I think what they need to do is develop an ambitious prospectus, but learn some of the lessons. So what did we see in this election? The manifesto was overloaded, they promised too much. Within it, they crammed in 310—15 year programme of government into five years, and people did not believe it could be delivered. They tried to do everything through national government, and there was a big gap in the manifesto around devolution and a radical plan to push power out of Westminster and Whitehall. Because you only deliver change if you give people power and control to make that change happen in the places where they live and work. Instead of talking about socialism, which, quite frankly, for a lot of people out there, it doesn’t mean anything, set out a vision for the type of country you are trying to create. Set out a vision that says, "We don’t think we should have an economy "where the minority of people do disproportionately better, "and huge swathes of people are left behind," you know, an economy where one in three of our children are living in poverty, one in which we don’t protect our environment, and you say instead, "Let’s club together, "let’s provide services that will look after us when we are "ill and old, like our NHS, "that will look after and educate our children." But didn’t millions of voters reject a Marxist prospectus? Well, I don’t believe it was a Marxist prospectus. At no point in the election did we talk about the country or economy we wanted. We talked about getting Brexit done, the NHS and trade deals. I think there was a job absolutely to respond to some of the challenges the country faces, but you have to do it in terms people care about, that they understand and relate to their life, and that’s what the Labour Party needs to do. Most of my life... APPLAUSE Most of my life I have been a left of centre Tory, a Ken Clarke, Michael Heseltine type Tory - but I voted for Tony Blair in ‘97 and 2002, and I only turned away from the Labour Party when he went mad and invaded Iraq. In that sense I am the sort of voter whom a lot of people in the Labour Party don’t went back, because you don’t see any place for us. 50 millions of us are disenfranchised out there in the middle of politics. Tony Blair was a pretty good Prime Minister until he invaded Iraq, and he did a lot of good things for Britain. If we get another Labour leader remotely resembling — and who, for me, means Keir Starmer, I, for one, will vote for him. APPLAUSE The man in the dark suit. I happen to agree with what Max has just said. Miatta, reality is, Labour lost because they had a totally unelectable leader, a front bench that was just not good enough and a manifesto that lacked credibility. The sooner the party understands that and recognises that by winning three general elections from the centre, that’s how you win power and then do things you want to do, you will never get back in. It will be ten years before we get near a Labour government again. APPLAUSE Is that what you will try to do, (live? I noticed after Rebecca Long—Bailey gave Jeremy Corbyn ten out of ten, you gave him six out of ten. Which is still pretty high, given it was the worst Labour defeat since 1935. Is Corbynism finished, as far as you are concerned? Would you go more to the centre, as the man suggested? The key thing to understand about the centre of British politics is that the centre of politics shifts. One of the thingsJeremy Corbyn and the last Labour leadership got right was that they understood, although they may not have been able to deliver it, is that there is a large number of people in this country who are ashamed at the levels of inequality in the country, notjust in terms of income, but also wealth, and there are people deeply concerned about issues like the impending climate crisis, for which we have a government who are missing in action. There are things here where we will find consensus across this country, with people like Max, where we understand we need to make some radical changes to how this country, how our economy operates, because we are facing an existential crisis, notjust from the climate, but also of democracy. I think if you want to understand why Labour lost, there are seeds of truth in what people said tonight. How do you win someone like Max back? Winning someone like Max back, you have to put forward a prospectus which actually say, and the Labour Party does... He’s right here. You can pitch to him now. I want... Let’s get you back, Max. I want Max’s vote for the Labour Party because ultimately, unless the Labour Party can appeal to the centre ground of British politics, then you are right, it can’t win. But the centre ground changes and shifts. So if we are talking about democratising the economy and giving ourselves a sense of ownership and agency in our lives, and these are not things that are necessarily just socialist, these are things we all want in our lives. If we we nt to have a world our children can inherit, where they can breathe clean air, where we have a national health care system where you don’t have 4.4 million people on the waiting list, these are things where the centre ground of British politics is there. That’s not a mad socialist perspective, and it’s the job of the Labour Party to be able to represent that in a way that is cooperative and a way in which people can buy into. Now, I understand what has happened in some of the seats we lost — I would say that has been 40 years in the making. If you look at the number of votes we have lost, millions of votes over the last 40 years. We as a party did so many good things between 1997 and 2010, but we also need to understand we got some things wrong. If we want to reach out back to those communities and also hold on to the seats we have got and build some more, we have to understand that the Labour Party will not be dictating to people in the 2lst century, it has to talk about the language of collaboration. That’s why I have been talking about the fact that if this is to be a five year project, we have to start talking about collaborating with other political parties and movements. The world isn’t going to wait... Is that because you think you can’t be popular enough on your own? No. I’ll tell you why. Ultimately, if you look at what’s happened to Scotland, for example, 80% of the seats there are controlled by the SNP. My constituents can’t wait for a ten year project to come back into power. It has to be in five. Why is the SNP is so powerful? Because politicians in Westminster have not been listening to the Scottish people. That’s what’s been happening. We have to listen to the Scottish people. If that means we have to work with the SNP to get rid of the Tories and bring in radical constitutional reform in this country so that we have a voting system fit for purpose, where we have a democracy where Zac Goldsmith loses his seat one day when the electorate don’t want him and ends up back in the samejob a week later when BorisJohnson appoints him — that’s wrong, and it’s not a democracy I want to live in. APPLAUSE Lots of hands up. The woman in the green sweater in the back. People seem to think Meghan Markle was harassed and hounded by the press — that wasn’t a millionth of a scratch of the relentless campaign aboutJeremy Corbyn from the moment he stood and was leader of the Labour Party, by a right wing press owned by multimillionaires, billionaire people, most of whom are tax exiles, who don’t even live in this country. And the truth is, I think you can argue all you want about who is the leader of the Labour Party, anyone standing for socialism will receive the same thing, and combined with the techniques used by Cambridge Analytica, will not stand a chance — they will not let a socialist be elected in this country. 0K. The man in the tie, there. I think the fact we are having this conversation again — with the leadership election afterJeremy Corbyn was elected the first time, you talk about collaboration, I have seen no collaboration within the Labour Party, and the fact you guys couldn’t get together throughout the last decade has really caused a place where we haven’t had a strong opposition in this country for some time. What I ask of the Labour Party is, can you unite together now going forward and become that strong opposition? The woman with the glasses. I believe, to get democracy really right, we have to get rid of the first past the post system we have at the moment. The Labour Party didn’t do half as bad as everybody says, in terms of votes. It was just in terms of seats. I find that incredibly unfair, that the Conservative Party has such a massive majority on only like 43% of the votes. APPLAUSE Let’s hear more from the audience — the woman on the edge, there, in the sweater. Ijust wanted to know — this is for Clive — if you really think it was a failure of policy or a failure of leadership, and what you would potentially bring to the Labour leadership role? Reasonably briefly, because I’ve given you quite a big shout here. I think it’s possible to say it was both. In terms of the policies, Miatta touched on it, it was one of the most radical manifestos. If I took any individual item, I would say there was a good argument for most of those policies in there, but if you will drop such a radical manifesto onto the electorate over a six—week period, you will have problems, and we did. There were issues of leadership — the issue of anti—Semitism was an issue, and people don’t think strong leadership was shown on that. And also on Brexit, whichever way wejumped, we should have jumped one way or the other. In the end, we ended up with our feet going in opposite directions. There are seeds of truth in all those arguments, but ultimately, if we want to bring this party back together, I will come to the point the lady mentioned just then, we have to think about how we will collaborate with others. The Conservative Party did this, they did a deal with the Brexit Party. What did we do? We didn’t do a deal with the Greens, the Liberal Democrats and others, and we paid the price for that. Anne. APPLAUSE I come from the North East, the newly Tory North East of England. I have several grandparents revolving in their graves. That’s a good example — there’s a part of the country, particularly the constituencies near where I’m from, North West Durham, the Bishop Aucklands, etc, where these were never supposed to leave the grip of the Labour Party — and they did. While I think Clive is absolutely right, and he is more open than many of his colleagues about what went wrong, I think the analysis is fundamentally flawed that says, "We offered too much, it was all too good," and these voters in these parts of the country where I never expected, growing up, to see the Conservative Party winning seats, it was always a dry run for Conservatives, and they scuttled back down to, ooh, I don’t know, Oxfordshire, it was a huge change in the political landscape. To say, "Well, we can get round it by doing some deals "or trying to advocate for changes to the electoral system," they may be good things, some of them, in their own right, but I don’t think they are anywhere near the answer to the scale of the defeat you suffered. I think they are. When you start to say... I know you do, but I disagree with you! That’s why we’re here, right? When you say, Jeremy Corbyn, you gave him six out of ten, Rebecca Long—Bailey gave him ten out of ten, and a bit of a laugh for that — my goodness, how many seats, in parts of the country that had never voted Tory in living memory, would you have to lose before you would say, actually, this was closer to nought out of ten? That is the real position the Labour Party is in, and it will only come back from that when it faces up to it and works out that if it is not forward looking, if it cannot support a vision for enterprise, for innovation, as well as for the things that you hold dear — equality, poverty alleviation — and I respect you very much for that, and I think the right of centre has learnt a lot from that. The trouble is, they have learned from it — you have not learnt from the other end of the spectrum, and that is why you were smashed, and you need to think hard and fast about how you come back from it. Brandon, we know who the nominees are, Clive is one of them. Who do you fear the most? Well, taking that point, and Rochelle’s original question, I am somewhat [oath to give advice to Labour, and Clive and his colleagues, on how they come back — but there is a couple of key points to think about. Today has been a good example of Labour’s problem. The reality is, the British public voted in a referendum, we had a clear result in the general election where nobody doubts that the key issues in that general election were people’s concern about Corbyn — I spent a lot of time in the Midlands and the North of England — and wanted to see the Government deliver on a democratic decision and get Brexit done. What happened today in the vote on Brexit? Labour and Clive voted against it again. What we are seeing is a group of people standing to lead the Labour Party who just weeks ago were telling the country that Corbyn was the answer to their problems. Suddenly now they think they are the fresh start. I just don’t think that works for Labour. 0K. APPMUSE We haven’t got that much time left, I just want to get one question which... a number of people put this forward, actually. Let’s hear from Jo Gearing. Jo, where are you? Yes. Are special advisers a threat to democracy? So, who are you thinking about there, Jo? Dominic Cummings comes to mind. 0K, and what’s making you think that in particular? Obviously he’s the special adviser to Borisjohnson. Yeah. Well, I’m concerned about the disdain for the processes of Westminster and Whitehall, and the power he wields in masterminding the proroguing of Parliament and refusing to appear before a select committee that Parliament... Yes. Some time ago, that was. Yeah. He’s a bit of a mystery, Dominic Cummings. He put out this job ad calling for wild cards and super—talented weirdos. For a personal assistant, he’s a bit of a mystery. 50, Brandon, you know the man well. I thought the job advert was a good thing to do. Anybody who applies for that will go through the proper process, but we want to hear from notjust the normal people, we want people to get involved in politics and be involved in government. I have worked with special advisers, I have a special adviser, they play an important... always have done. Go back to the Labour years, or through ours, special advisers do play an important part, working with the Civil Service, with ministers and giving a political input. They are important. We are very lucky in this country. I’m sure, if you talk to some of the Labour ministers of the past, they will say the same, we have some very smart people who are not elected politicians but have something to contribute and are able to play an important part. I have seen Dominic Cummings in action. I think he is someone who is really powerful at opening up new ideas, driving things forward and asking questions and challenging things, as special advisers are meant to do, and ministers are there to do. It is for ministers to appear in front of a select committee, as we do, and we get grilled for that. I think special advisers play an important part in politics. I was pleased to see that kind of advert that’s saying to people, "If you don’t come from the kind of background "that you think normally has a job to do in Westminster, "don’t let that stop you. "If you’ve got something to say, if you’ve got something interesting, "come and apply, and be part of something "that could be quite exciting and interesting, "because you’ve always got something to say." When you say "exciting and interesting" — it did also say, "It will involve lots of uninteresting trivia "that makes my life easier, which you won’t enjoy." Well, he is making that point that it is hard work. You are really selling this job! It is really hard work, and special advisers, part of theirjob is to make sure we are challenging policy and make sure we have got policy that can deliver for people across the country. There is a hard grind to that, but we are going into an exciting time for our country and people have the chance to be a part of it. Being more serious about it, which is what you’re referring to, have special advisers, "spads", as they’re known, become too powerful? My first reaction with Dominic Cummings’ remark about weirdos — we should restrict the weirdos to the benches of the House of Commons. I think we need... CLIVE: That’s a bit much! Clive has taken some offence at that. It’s probably true. We need serious career administrators. The Civil Service is not perfect, and there is plenty of scope for improvement — but the idea the Civil Service should be... One of the problems, the Civil Service has become demoralised by the cult of special advisers, that too manyjobs are being given to unelected people simply by arbitrary decisions of ministers. I think we need to boost the Civil Service and restore the morale and faith in the Civil Service as a career. I certainly don’t think if Dominic Cummings is going to be any sort of exemplar of who will run this country, I would sooner stick with Sir Humphrey. I think Sir Humphrey was afar better person to run Britain than Dominic Cummings. I would just say... Briefly. Really briefly. To be very clear, these two things are not mutually exclusive. I think the Civil Service in this country is phenomenal. Having good special advisers working with the Civil Service is what delivers for our country — with ministers. Anne. It shows you’re getting on a bit when you remember the New Labour special adviser, one of whom said there were 17 people who run the country, and exactly the same sort of question as the lady in the audience put was being asked — I think special advisers and civil servants, they are a ying and yang, perhaps even more a relationship, sometimes, of dogs and lamp posts — they don’t always get along. I think the sort of Dominic Cummings, disruption, we had it in the Cameron era with Steve Hilton, they were always incredibly badly dressed and quite difficult, but I think they do shake up the system, Max. As much as I admire the Sir Humphreys, and if she’s female, Sir Henrietta - Lady Henrietta - you do need this sort of shock to the system sometimes. I don’t mind that Dominic Cummings wants to bring in different people and have different kinds of roles and a bit more challenge to the system. Our politics is changing, and we need to bring different people into the heart of it. The only thing that rankled with me is if say that you want super—talented weirdos and that they should think outside the box, and then say, "Oh, by the way, if you don’t get along with us, "we will bin you within a month," I thought, well, you do then have to acknowledge that there is a bit of a contradiction there, and the system has to allow for people to feel free to speak their minds in government and not feel they have to be part of, how shall I put it... a sort of Boris cult. Would you be looking forsuperweirdos, Clive? There’s probably enough of them in Parliament already, as Max was saying. So, Ifind Dominic Cummings — does he undermined democracy? He’s like a Rasputin—type character. You kind of feel, "If only the Tsar knew!" But actually I think BorisJohnson and the Government are quite happy, because he isn’t accountable, and he can do all of these things, and he can be the bullet magnet which takes the ﬂak — but actually, what this comes down to is a lack of accountability of our government and the executive, of which he is a functionary. I think what it comes down to, really, when you analyse it, is that Dominic Cummings ultimately wields power because he is allowed to by the executive and by the Prime Minister. Until you can hold the Prime Minister accountable in a far better way, and the executive, then I am afraid to say people like Dominic Cummings will always be seen as these characters who wield this power — but actually, he doesn’t. He has the power because BorisJohnson and the executive give him that power. Miatta? Having been both a civil servant and a special adviser, there is clearly a role for both, and it is important for how government functions. I do, however, think that Dominic Cummins is a bit renegade — that’s his brand, that’s what he does, he goes in, he disrupts, you know, he’s difficult to work with. He does things that are uncontroversial, does things that shake up the system... That are controversial, not uncontroversial. That are controversial, and does things that shake up the system and I think creating some change and pace in the Civil Service is a good thing. The appetite to do that is... But there are ways to do it. If he wants to wage a war against the very Civil Service the Government needs to deliver its free trade agreement, to deliver any of the change they claim they want to make in the country, you cannot go trashing and destroying the Civil Service, who have done a phenomenaljob against a difficult political background. You were a special adviser — what would you say the top attribute of a top spad should be? Be humble, be smart, listen and work with your colleagues — unfortunately, I don’t think he always does these things. Humble sped! I can’t get Dead Ringers out of my head, which is that he’s the undead Jonathan Harker. Which I find quite amusing! But that’s in my own personal... Well, I’m afraid we are out of time, much as we could go on talking about special advisers, Dominic Cummings and others. Next week we are in Liverpool and the following week, we will be in Stoke Newington in London. So callus if you would like to be in the audience, or go to the Question Time website — you can follow the instructions there. You can have this conversation on Radio 5 Live on Question Time Extra Time with Adrian Childs and guests, and that is starting now. But for now, thank you to my panel, to the audience for coming along and to you at home for listening and watching. From Oxford, bye—bye.