Good evening and welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel... Matt Hancock, the Health Secretary, newly out of isolation having had coronavirus, and joining us straight coronavims, and joining us straight from coronavirus, and joining us straight from answering questions at the press conference in Downing Street. Elected as an MP in 1997, the former Shadow Home Secretary, now Elected as an MP in 1997, the former Shadow Home Secretary, new chair of Shadow Home Secretary, now chair of the Commons Home Affairs Committee, Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Now’s, Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Novfs, professor and Yvette Cooper. Donna Kinnair, Now’s, professor and head of the world’s largest nurses union. And born in Uganda, a trained lawyer turned daric, since Uganda, a trained lawyer turned cleric, since 2005, the Archbishop daric, since 2005, the Archbishop of York, john cleric, since 2005, the Archbishop of York, John Sentamu. Now, if you of York, john Sentamu. Now, if you have been of York, John Sentamu. Now, if you have been watching, you will know that this is not the usual Question Time, we do not have a studio audience, for obvious reasons. This week, we have three panellists, all seated at a suitable distance, and this week’s pre—recorded questions this week’s pre-recorded questions come this week’s pre—recorded questions come from Rugby, because that is where we were originally intending to be. But we will also be taking questions and comments via social media, so if you want to contact us with your questions and comments, I will feed those into the discussion as we go. We were watching the Clap For Our Carers, and here in the studio, we’re For Our Carers, and here in the studio, we’rejust want For Our Carers, and here in the studio, we’re just want to add our quick round of applause. quick round of applause. Thank you very much indeed. Let’s take our first question tonight, down the line, a pre—recorded question from line, a pre-recorded question from Adam, who is line, a pre—recorded question from Adam, who is 22 and a student. Good evening. I Adam, who is 22 and a student. Good evening. lam Adam, who is 22 and a student. Good evening. I am currently a Masters student at the University of Birmingham but student at the University of Birmingham butl student at the University of Birmingham but I also work part—time Birmingham but I also work part-time at my [oral Birmingham but I also work part—time at my local supermarket. During my at my [oral supermarket. During my shifts I at my local supermarket. During my shifts I encounter quite a lot of customers, and therefore I am wondering why Germany has mustered over half a million tests per week, whereas we have only managed 5000-8000 per whereas we have only managed 5000—8000 per day. Why does the 5000-8000 per day. why does the panel think 5000—8000 per day. Why does the panel think this has happened? You were talking about this in the press conference earlier on today, why conference eartier on today, why have we conference earlier on today, why have we lagged behind? Well, we’ve got one of the biggest testing programs in Europe, but there are places like Germany where they have been able to do more tests, because they started with a huge diagnostics they started with a huge diagnostic industry, they started with a huge diagnostics industry, which is they started with a huge diagnostics industry, which isjust not they started with a huge diagnostics industry, which is just not the thing that we’ve had traditionally as a country. They’ve been the as a country. Therve been the European as a country. They’ve been the European centre of diagnostics, started with over 100 labs in Germany. But none of that takes away from the absolutely accurate point, which is that we want more testing. I understand why people want the certainty that you get from having a test. So, we’re ramping up testing, we’ve hit the goal of having 10,000 tests a day by the end of March, and today, I’ve set the goal of 100,000 tests a day by the end of this month. And to do that... Can I tests a day by the end of this month. And to do that... Can Ijust month. And to do that... (“an Ijust be clear, month. And to do that... Can Ijust be clear, because I did not quite understand it in the press conference, because there was a talk of 25,000 by the end of the month, and 100,000 by the end of the month, which is it? 100,000 by the end of the month. The goal was 25,000, and by pulling together out of international effort, I think we can international effort, I think we ran get to international effort, I think we can get to 100,000. 50 that is the goal get to 100,000. So that is the goal I have set get to 100,000. 50 that is the goal I have set today. And the whole pharmaceutical industry is going to have to help and play its part, in the same way that we’ve got expert manufacturers who have never manufactured a ventilator before now manufacturing ventilators, the pharmaceutical industry, that normally deals in other types of drugs, like vaccines and what have 7°“- drugs, like vaccines and what have you, they are joining this drugs, like vaccines and what have you, they arejoining this national effort to get enough testing. 50, we effort to get enough testing. So, we do test effort to get enough testing. 50, we do test more, we’ve tested more than France, the Netherlands, lots of France, the Nethertands, lots of other France, the Netherlands, lots of other similar countries, but there are countries like Germany that are ahead of us, and I think that we’ve got to increase the amount of testing. And that’s important so that is what we are going to have to do. To be clear, the aim is 100,000 by the end of this month, to test if peopla have by the end of this month, to test if people have coronavirus, not if they peopla have coronavims, not if they have had it, if people have coronavirus, not if they have had it, if they actually have it at the time of taking the test? It is 100,000 tests overall. Both types of test? Exactly, on all the different strands of testing policy. We have five different strengths. Essentially, there are two types, as you Fssentially, there are two types, as you 5“- Essentially, there are two types, as you say, there is either the swab test to see if you have got it or a blood test to see if you have had it. But the latter, the science isn’t yet developed enough for those tests to be in large scale good enough not to give false results, which is worse than having no test at all, because it gives false comfort. So, just to be clear, the 25,000 is to see if people have the 25,000 is to see if peopla have the symptoms? If 25,000 is to see if people have the symptoms? If people actually have symptoms? If peopla actually have it? That symptoms? If people actually have it? That was the old goal. The policy is really clear. It is that by the end of this month, we are going to have 100,000 tests per day. That is what we need to do as a country. To test if people have got coronavirus and if they have had it? The whola coronavirus and if they have had it? The whole lot. Both types of tests. Yvette? I strongly welcome the measures announced by Matt today, the commitment to broadening the number of organisations that are involved in doing the testing, the universities, the private sector, the charitable sector, all of that, the charitabla sector, all of that, I think it the charitable sector, all of that, I think it is really good and really important. If we’re honest, this has been hugely frustrating, the whole been hugely fmstrating, the whole process up been hugely frustrating, the whole process up to now and the confusion about the testing, but actually to have that commitment to broaden it out is really welcome because I think the centralised approach and just using Public Health England, therre just using Public Health England, they’re doing a great just using Public Health England, they’re doing a greatjob but it is therre doing a great job but it is just not they’re doing a greatjob but it is just not enough to do the scale of the tests that we could clearly the tests that we could dearty need. the tests that we could clearly need. But I still have, look, there are questions about how and why we got to hear and so on, but putting those aside, because the important thing is where we go now — I still thing is where we go now - I still have a big thing is where we go now — I still have a big question about the overall objective with this, and how this testing fits into the wider strategy. Because I’m not sure what your plan is around the community testing, is the community testing just going to be the antibodies, the have you had it, are you now immune? And is it an immunity test for the community? Or is the community testing strategy about whether peopla testing strategy about whether people are infectious, the Count of peopla are infectious, the Count of South people are infectious, the Count of South Korea strategy, testing people, tracing the contacts and so peoplc, tracing the contacts and so on, which people, tracing the contacts and so on, which the WA WHO has always rallad on, which the WA WHO has always called for? There has been this debate in Britain about really whether the Govan strategy was immunity, or whether the Govan strategy was immunity, orwhether whether the Govan strategy was immunity, or whether it was a suppression, and it has never really been clear to us, and I am still not clear with this testing strategy whether you are pursuing immunity, or whether you’re pursuing suppression, as the ultimate objective. To be really clear, we are bending the curve down, so if you like, all it are bending the curve down, so if you like, cell it what you will, it you like, all it what you will, it is about you like, cell it what you will, it is about getting the curve of the virus down, to slow the spread. It is not about trying to achieve immunity of the whole population. immunity of the whola population. It’s immunity of the whole population. It’s about trying to get the curve down and to protect lives. And to do that, you need both types of test, exactly as you say. You need both the tests to test if people have had the tests to test if peopla have had it, and the tests to test if people have had it, and therefore they are likely to be immune, like hopefully I am. But to get lots of those, people keep trying to sell me these tests, PNQMNCY trying to sell me these tests, pregnancy type tests, we keep checking whether they work, and so far we haven’t found one that works. And then also ramping up the so—called swab test, up your nose, so-ralled swab test, up your nose, to find out so—called swab test, up your nose, to find out if so-ralled swab test, up your nose, to find out if you so—called swab test, up your nose, to find out if you currently have the vims. to find out if you currently have the virus. Both of those are very the vims. Both of those are very important. So, the virus. Both of those are very important. 50, the community testing important. So, the community testing of the important. 50, the community testing of the current important. So, the community testing of the current infection, are you planning to increase the tracing and so on as well? I understand, ﬂattening so on as well? I understand, flattening the curve, absolutely ﬂattening the curve, absolutely right, flattening the curve, absolutely right, everybody wants to make sure that the NHS can cope, and they are that the NHS ran cope, and they are the that the NHS can cope, and they are the heroes dealing with this at the moment. But in terms of how we come out of the lockdown, how we come through this, is it by getting more peopla to through this, is it by getting more people to have had it, which seems peopla to have had it, which seems to be -- people to have had it, which seems to be —— seem to be the government to be -- seem to be the government strategy at the to be —— seem to be the government strategy at the beginning, which was worrying, or is it that we get to a point where we can do proper point where we ran do proper community point where we can do proper community testing and tracing? And if it’s the second, which I hope it is, that’s great... I don’t even need to be here! These are the questions I wanted to get answered. If you get that level of community testing and tracing for infection, don’t you need to go way, way beyond the 100,000 that you’re talking about at the moment? Shouldn’t we be setting a much bigger objective even if we can’t get there in a month? Yes, we have a goal of 250,000 but I Yes, we have a goal of250,000 but I wanted to put a Yes, we have a goal of 250,000 but I wanted to put a timeframe on it and I wanted to say to my team, to the I wanted to sayto my team, to the team at I wanted to say to my team, to the team at Public Health England, who have been brilliant on this, to the NHS and to the life sciences industry and the companies involved, and the charities, all the rest of them, this is our collective goal, them, this is our collactive goal, put a date on it, them, this is our collective goal, put a date on it, put a number on it. I put a date on it, put a number on it. lam put a date on it, put a number on it. I am the one who has put that meat, I have it. I am the one who has put that meet, I have said it. I am the one who has put that meat, I have said that this is our goal and we have now got to make it happen. And there is one further really important point in this, which is that of course, getting to broad community testing is important and is the goal, but we have to prioritise the tests that we’ve got, starting with the patient for whom it could be a life or death matter, then the critical NHS staff, then key workers, and once we’ve got enough tests for all of them, we can enough tests for all of them, we ran then get to the enough tests for all of them, we can then get to the community. On that point, Donna... It is important to point, Donna... It is importantto remember point, Donna... It is important to remember that people coming into the hospital, come in from the community. So, there is Covid—19 in community. So, there is Covid-19 in the community. community. So, there is Covid—19 in the community. So, we do have to test the community, because it’s not just existing in hospital. If you look across, many of the people that look across, many of the peoplo that are getting look across, many of the people that are getting Covid—19 are in the are getting Covid-19 are in the community. are getting Covid—19 are in the community. One thing you and I know is that it is important, if your child has got a cough or you have got a cough, that you understand what it is, because neither do you want to be a spreader, neither do you want to self—isolate for M you want to self-isolate for 14 days, unless you want to self—isolate for M days, unless you know that you’ve got it. So it’s hugely important and we are going to have to ramp up the tests across the community. We have focused on the hospitals because we know it is a place where it is spreading, but equally, we know that one in ten healthcare workers are one in ten healthrare workers are also peopla one in ten healthcare workers are also people that are spreading the also peopla that are spreading the virus, so also people that are spreading the virus, so we need the tests both in the community and in hospitals. I noticed that Matt, you would not commit to saying when health workers would get the coronavirus test that they require, as many as they felt they needed in order to be able to see if they have got symptoms, whether they can come back to work, whether they ran come back to work, what is your whether they can come back to work, what is your feeling about that, Donna? Well, we have to get it, because if we don’t, we want to be able to work. We know that although the figures are getting better from this evening’s press conference, we know that at anyone time, between 25% know that at anyone time, between 2596 and know that at anyone time, between 25% and 40% of our healthcare workers are self—isolating. How does workers are self-isolating. How does that tally with workers are self—isolating. How does that tally with the figure that you gave at the press conference? gave at the press conference? 5.7% gave at the press conference? 5.796 of gave at the press conference? 5.7% of doctors. And 8% of all NHS staff. of doctors. And 896 of all NHS staff. On Monday of doctors. And 8% of all NHS staff. On Monday we were told that it was 2511. Yet, On Monday we were told that it was 25%. Yet, but that survey was not an 2596. Yet, but that survey was not an accurate survey. 25%. Yet, but that survey was not an accurate survey. And so I wanted to get that figure and explain it to the public. Because 8% is much lower the public. Because 896 is much lower than peopla the public. Because 8% is much lower than people had previously reported, but it is still a high figure, and this is why Donna is completely right about the need for the testing within the NHS, and then once we’ve got to that, then we can keep the got to that, then we ran keep the numbers got to that, then we can keep the numbers going up and keep expanding. john, I numbers going up and keep expanding. john, Iwant numbers going up and keep expanding. john, I want to numbers going up and keep expanding. John, I want to come to you in a john, I want to come to you in a minute. I john, I want to come to you in a minute. lam john, I want to come to you in a minute. Iamjust John, I want to come to you in a minute. I am just going to read out some of the tweets and comments that we are getting coming in. This one — we are getting coming in. This one - would you agree we are getting coming in. This one — would you agree that you were slow off the mark? You knew that this was coming, and testing and ventilators were requested at a late stage. This one... Isn’t it that we started on the wrong track with heard immunity and then changed track? This meant we were at the back of the queue for buying tests. This one... 100,000 tests per day right now, why can’t we. tests per day right now, why can’t we, is it lack of money, lack of testing kits? What is your view on testing kits? what is your view on all of this, testing kits? What is your view on all of this, John? First of all, I all of this, john? First of all, I want to begin all of this, John? First of all, I want to begin by praising the NHS staff, and in my book, they should get the tests, they should be a priority, just like the patients. Because they are putting their lives in great danger and because of their vocation, so in great danger and because of their vocation, sol in great danger and because of their vocation, so I would have thought the priority should have been, really, the patient and all those who are on the front line, plus those working in social care. I those working in social rare. I think those working in social care. I think the testing should happen. And in the end, I don’t think that the government could have prepared better. You can do your best, but better. You ran do your best, but when it better. You can do your best, but when it happens, it hits you pretty hard. It’s almost like having an earthquake, you can prepare as much earthquake, you ran prepare as much as you like, but earthquake, you can prepare as much as you like, but until it happens... One thing the government hasn’t done is to do what Kitchener did — your is to do what Kitchener did - your country needs is to do what Kitchener did — your country needs you. And so, we have galvanised, the industries, everything, but we are coming to you slightly late. When we had, for slightly late. when we had, for example, slightly late. When we had, for example, Formula 1, Mercedes—Benz, example, Formula 1, Mercedes-Benz, saying they are example, Formula 1, Mercedes—Benz, saying they are capable of producing breathing equipment, they can breathing equipment, they ran produce a breathing equipment, they can produce a thousand a day, there are many other companies that actually could, without relying on things coming from overseas. So you need now to galvanise all the industries and all the scientists and everybody else and say, we have a war with this invisible danger, and therefore we want you to do everything that you ran, and we want you to do everything that you can, and so, for the rest of us, you ran, and so, for the rest of us, who are not on you can, and so, for the rest of us, who are not on the front line, we need to do exactly what you say — need to do exactly what you say - staying at need to do exactly what you say — staying at home, protecting the NHS and children and saving lives. This is what we can do. But collectively, is what we ran do. But collactively, this country is what we can do. But collectively, this country could manufacture some of that stuff pretty fast, pretty quickly, if all the industries were invited to come to the table. 50 I invited to come to the tabla. So I think you come invited to come to the table. 50 I think you come to it a bit late, you should have really done it. For the things we’ve done so far, I should have really done it. For the things we’ve done so far, Ijust want to say some of them, particularly that you gave the responsibility to science, you didn’t ignore the scientists that needed to come, and I think we would have had already personal protection equipment much faster, because in this country, there is things can be manufactured very quickly and very fast. And with the army, should have found somebody who is good in logistic, in a found somebody who is good in logistics, in a battle, to distribute things, to be in charge of it and not distribute things, to be in charge of it and notjust distribute things, to be in charge of it and not just the distribute things, to be in charge of it and notjust the health professionals, because their role is to heal. Have you found a great brigadier or a major commanding the distribution of all of this and not just relying on a haphazard way of doing it? ﬂ I agree so much. We have, we’ve got Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkable Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkabla man, who is Brigadier Phil Prosser, a remarkable man, who is in charge of the logistical effort of getting this protective equipment out, and the army have been brilliant in responding to this. But do you also agree with responding to this. But do you also agree withJohn that responding to this. But do you also agree with John that you’ve responding to this. But do you also agree withJohn that you’ve come to agree with john that you’ve come to this a bit agree withJohn that you’ve come to this a bit late? I think it’s a bit unfair. On the testing, for instance, we’ve had the private companies, the testing, the British diagnostic companies, involved in this from the diagnostic companies, involved in this from the start. We just have to fast the this from the start. We just have to cast the net wider and wider to get fast the net wider and wider to get things going cast the net wider and wider to get things going faster and faster, so, for instance, the universities and university labs, they’ve been involved. Companies that are like Thermo Fisher, 3 global involved. Companies that are like Thermo Fisher, a global company like ran docks, Thermo Fisher, 3 global company like ran docks, which is a British m"WWW- ran docks, which is a British company, they’ve been involved for a company, therve been involved for a long time, but I company, they’ve been involved for a long time, but I agree. I say that to explain what we’ve been doing, but I agree with the Archbishop’s point, which is this really is a national effort. Everybody can play national effort. Everybody ran play their part, national effort. Everybody can play their part, whether it’s by staying at home, or whether it is if you are in one of these industries where you ran really do in one of these industries where you can really do your bit, then by ran really do your bit, then by stepping up can really do your bit, then by stepping up to the plate. If can really do your bit, then by stepping up to the plate. Ifjust one example, GlaxoSmithKline, great British business, never done any testing before in its life but pharmaceuticals are obviously quite close to testing, very briefly and dose to testing, very brieﬂy and did close to testing, very briefly and did some for the Olympics, and when did some for the Olympic, and when I phoned them did some for the Olympics, and when I phoned them up and said, you’ve really got to turn your great industrial muscle to this problem, industrial musda to this problam, they said, industrial muscle to this problem, they said, how do we help? Let’s do it, let’s make it happen. That’s the attitude that we need. If I may still say yes, some stuff you have done and I’m not critical of because this is something you can never this is something you ran never prepare for. this is something you can never prepare for. What I’m trying to say, prepare for. what I’m trying to say, today, I heard prepare for. What I’m trying to say, today, I heard you for the first time falling today, I heard you for the first time calling upon all industry, all universities, all labs. Why didn’t universities, all labs. why didn’t you do that universities, all labs. Why didn’t you do that two weeks ago? That’s what I’m talking about. Galvanising together everybody, to me it was today, not three weeks ago. Literally two weeks ago I did do the same cell but I obviously didn’t get same all but I obviously didn’t get it to your ears. same cell but I obviously didn’t get it to your ears. In this great response to this virus, you know, you just do everything you can and you just do everything you ran and when we you just do everything you can and when we come up with an idea and we haven’t thought of it before, I’m not going to shilly—shallying about. not going to shilly-shallying about. We just get not going to shilly—shallying about. We just get on with it. Actually, I have to say, this has been true, the response of the country as a whole has been great. People haven’t been political or picking things apart. Generally the senses this is a war, as Archbishop Sentamu just said, but it’s a war on which we are all on the same side and that changes the “Y the same side and that changes the way that we deal with it, because it means we’ve all got to pull together. I think that’s completely right. This is something where you want the whole country pulling together and it’s why you want all of the industry, why you want all of the different organisations, and everybody wants to be part of this and wants to innovate. I guess the only thing I would add is I think you said something really important today, Matt, when you talked about levelling with people. I think that levelling with peopla. I think that does levelling with people. I think that does also mean actually also levelling with people and being honest with things about things that should have happened faster or been done earlier. That’s important done eartier. That’s important because done earlier. That’s important because it’s about building trust. because it’s about building tmst. Yeah. because it’s about building trust. Yeah. And when you are in a pandemic trust really matters and if people trust really matters and if peopla think, or if trust really matters and if people think, or if NHS workers who are on the front line with this and struggling with the pressures they stmggling with the pressures they are facing, if struggling with the pressures they are facing, if they lose trust and feel like they are being given a line from a press release or whatever, it makes it much harder to build that collective thing. So, build that collactive thing. So, whilst I build that collective thing. So, whilst I would strongly support the measures you’ve announced today, I think I would probably also urge you to also be honest about the things that may have gone wrong earlier on, that may have gone wrong eartier on, or may not have that may have gone wrong earlier on, or may not have slotted into place as fast as they should have done. And I think the impact, if you are not honest, is we lose confidence. So, people hearing about Great Ormond Street this afternoon having a problem with its cardiac suite will lose confidence, because... Why will lose confidence, because... why were they will lose confidence, because... Why were they having a problem? We had somebody who was infective operating and that means the staff will now need to self isolates, patients will have to be tracked and contacted, so it’s important that actually we do have the tests available. I was having a debate on Newsnight the other night. Chris Hopson was saying there is only two tests available. The timelines for us to get the swabs and having them on site in the hospital need to be explicit because otherwise we lose confidence. The front line staff lose confidence in what people are saying. I think this what peopla are saying. I think this transparency what people are saying. I think this transparency is really important and also being clear about some of the challanges, also being clear about some of the challenges, right? This is difficult challanges, right? This is difficult and challenges, right? This is difficult and there will be bumps in the road. I hope that by now these antibody tests, the blood tests, you know, we bought a lot of them. We bought from nine different companies and it’s disappointing that the first few ones we’ve run are just not high ones we’ve nm are just not high enough ones we’ve run are just not high enough quality, but we’ve been completely upfront about the fact we bought them and they haven’t worked and we’ll keep searching until we find one that is good enough. It’s probably fair to say there is a confusion early on about what the confusion earty on about what the strategy was, confusion early on about what the strategy was, on the immunity suppression... Never strategy was, on the immunity suppression... Neverwith strategy was, on the immunity suppression... Never with me. strategy was, on the immunity suppression... Neverwith me. In suppression... Never with me. In which rase suppression... Neverwith me. In which case there’s been different views within the government and that does happen. We understand that will happen sometimes, but... Do you accept that? Know, I don’t. happen sometimes, but... Do you accept that? Know, Idon’t. I’m happen sometimes, but... Do you accept that? Know, I don’t. I’m not accept that? Know, Idon’t. I’m not going to get into accept that? Know, I don’t. I’m not going to get into the communications of it but we really clear about the strategy here, it is to save lives by ﬂattening strategy here, it is to save lives by flattening the curve and building byﬂatbening the curve and building the by flattening the curve and building the NHS capacity. Let’s take another question, a pre—recorded question, question, a pre-recorded question, from jennifer question, a pre—recorded question, from Jennifer Brennan, Asaph what —— from jennifer Brennan, Asaph what -- a software from Jennifer Brennan, Asaph what —— a software company director. from Jennifer Brannan, Asaph what —— a software company director. What is a software company director. what is truth a software company director. What is truth about how our front line workers have ended up without the PPE they so desperately need? Where PPE they so desperately need? where are we just too PPE they so desperately need? Where are we just too late in placing are wejust too late in placing orders are we just too late in placing orders due to the incorrect initial strategy? Donna, this must be something you are hearing from your members several times a day, I would think? Yes, it’s probably the most falls I’ve had, think? Yes, it’s probably the most calls I’ve had, the most e—mails falls I’ve had, the most e-mails I’ve had calls I’ve had, the most e—mails I’ve had and contact I’ve had is about personal protection equipment and I think we’ve been urging the government for weeks now that this needed to be a priority, because, you know, you just cannot nurse property, you know, you just cannot nurse properly, there is no nurse that is property, there is no nurse that is less than properly, there is no nurse that is less than two metres away from a patient if they are delivering care, patient if they are delivering rare, so it was patient if they are delivering care, so it was really important, I think, as jennifer said, so it was really important, I think, asJennifer said, that we ramped up as jennifer said, that we ramped up the personal asJennifer said, that we ramped up the personal protection equipment, and also that it isn’t the personal protection equipment, and also that it isn’tjust the intensive care unit, that we sometimes get waylaid into thinking because as we said earlier a lot of because as we said eartier a lot of the because as we said earlier a lot of the coronavirus, or Covid—19, is in the coronavims, or Covid-19, is in the community, the coronavirus, or Covid—19, is in the community, so actually if you are going as a health care worker or are going as a health rare worker or in social are going as a health care worker or in social care are going as a health rare worker or in social rare you are going as a health care worker or in social care you can be coming in social rare you ran be coming across it, or you in social care you can be coming across it, or you can have it from across it, or you ran have it from members of your across it, or you can have it from members of your own family, so we do need personal protection equipment. Whether it was that we didn’t have whether it was that we didn’t have enough, I’ve Whether it was that we didn’t have enough, I’ve been assured several times that we do have enough, however, it’s the logistics. But, however, it’s the logistic. But, even if however, it’s the logistics. But, even if that is true, that is going to mn out. even if that is true, that is going to run out. If you think about, you to mn out. If you think about, you know, the to run out. If you think about, you know, the number is as they are now, we do have to make sure that we’ve got a all to we do have to make sure that we’ve got a fall to arms we do have to make sure that we’ve got a call to arms in this country got a all to arms in this country to be able got a call to arms in this country to be able to manufacture the right equipment, because, actually, if we equipment, because, actually, ifwe don’t have equipment, because, actually, if we don’t have it we won’t have people don’t have it we won’t have peopla to be don’t have it we won’t have people to be able to deliver the care that to be able to deliver the rare that we need, to be able to deliver the care that we need, whether that’s doctors, nurses, physics. They all need it nurses, physios. They all need it because they nurses, physics. They all need it because they are up close and personal. What was your response to personal. what was your response to what personal. What was your response to what Matt had to say the press conference today? So my response is that, 0K, conference today? So my response is that, OK, I hear conference today? So my response is that, OK, I hearwhat conference today? So my response is that, OK, I hear what Matt says and I believe it, to a degree, but I’m still... To a degree! Because I’m still getting calls on the ground that says, yes, I had a supply yesterday, but it’s running out and yesterday, but it’s mnning out and I’ve used yesterday, but it’s running out and I’ve used it all and that is the issue. 0K, we can move millions of issue. 0K, we ran move millions of pieces of issue. 0K, we can move millions of pieces of equipment but it needs to be sustained so that actually people be sustained so that actually peopla have it be sustained so that actually people have it tomorrow, or when they need at the next day. There is no point in ringing a hotline, as many nurses in ringing a hoﬂine, as many nurses have done, in ringing a hotline, as many nurses have done, and heard at the other end we don’t have it to give it to 7°“- end we don’t have it to give it to you, so if we are going to tell health care workers that this is health rare workers that this is availabla, health care workers that this is available, we make sure that it is availabla, we make sure that it is availabla, available, we make sure that it is available, otherwise it causes a problem. Lack of confidence and problem. lack of confidence and people do problem. Lack of confidence and people do not feel secure in peopla do not feel secure in delivering people do not feel secure in delivering care. The reports we are delivering rare. The reports we are seeing about delivering care. The reports we are seeing about nurses rationing whether or not they can treat whether or not they ran treat patients whether or not they can treat patients because they don’t have the protective equipment, is there any truth in that? I’m sure there must be if they are reporting that but in main nurses don’t like to ration rare. main nurses don’t like to ration care. What they do is put themselves rare. what they do is put themselves at risk and care. What they do is put themselves at risk and often that’s problematic. So, we will see where problamatic. So, we will see where peopla problematic. So, we will see where people haven’t been provided with the equipment they themselves are going down stop that means there is a patient without care. We started a patient without rare. We started off with a patient without care. We started off with 40,000 less. We’ve had a all to arms, off with 40,000 less. We’ve had a call to arms, people have stepped all to arms, peopla have stepped forward, call to arms, people have stepped forward, but if we don’t provide the right equipment, in every other country we’ve seen the health workers go down first when you were asked about protective equipment, you said we’ll get it rolled out by this weekend, 151 lorries or whatever it was, I got the impression it was sorted was I know, this is another mammoth effort and I agree with every word of what Donna just said. Nurses, doctors, all health care professionals put themselves literally on the front line and we’ve seen, very sadly, four doctors die so far and some nurses. They are not even counting the nurses, Matt. I need a conversation. Say that again? We haven’t even counted the nurses yet. I keep asking for the stats on nurses. I didn’t know that, we will sort that out. I am asking, we as a nation are asking our doctors, nurses, physios, pharmacists, to treat peopla nurses, physios, pharmacists, to treat people and to treat people you treat peopla and to treat peopla you do have treat people and to treat people you do have to treat peopla and to treat peopla you do have to say, treat people and to treat people you do have to say, as you said, up close and personal. We have this mammoth logistical exercise and it’s true, Donna is right, that we do have the supplies. We have a massive sunplv have the supplies. We have a massive supply in an enormous warehouse in the North West. We are getting... We’ve got enough of it at the right time? Yes, for now, we’ve got to keep the replenishing it and the domestic call to arms is important domestic all to arms is important here domestic rail to arms is important here as domestic call to arms is important here as well. We have domestic suppliers who might have made dosing suppliers who might have made closing a couple of weeks ago who are now turning to make protective equipment and that is important. We’ve got to keep replenishing it. We’ve got to keep replanishing it. But We’ve got to keep replenishing it. But essentially the quantity of the stuff is not the problem in PPE, in protective equipment. The challenge is getting it to every single one of the 1.4 million NHS staff, the over 2 million social care staff. It’s a 2 million social rare staff. It’s a huge 2 million social care staff. It’s a huge logistical exercise. If we come back to the previous point about transparency and openness of the challenges, I’m completely open about the challenge here because getting kit out of the warehouse and into the hands and onto the face of every single nurse who needs it, every single doctor, the right kit, that is one of the biggest logistical challenges of peacetime. The reason, coming back to the original question, the reason it suddenly became a thing is that when we put in the social distancing measures the demands for PPE from the front line suddenly shot up, so peopla did the front line suddenly shot up, so people did have local stores of it peopla did have [oral stores of it but they people did have local stores of it but they burn through that very quickly. This is where the army have been brilliant so far and I’m really glad to say that the number of calls glad to say that the number of falls to our glad to say that the number of calls to our hotline has fallen in the to our hoﬂine has fallen in the last few to our hotline has fallen in the last few days, which implies that there are fewer problems. But until every nurse and every doctor and every other health professional and in social care, until they have the in social rare, until they have the protective in social care, until they have the protective equipment that they need, I will not rest on this one. Yes, we got the emergency supplies two weeks at a go, we got cracking, but this is an ongoing problem that we are going to have to just keep working at all the way through this. And john, it’s a at all the way through this. And John, it’s a huge logistical john, it’s a huge logistical problam, John, it’s a huge logistical problem, isn’t it? A logistical problam, isn’t it? A logistical challange, problem, isn’t it? A logistical challenge, anyway, there’s no challange, anyway, there’s no getting challenge, anyway, there’s no getting away from that? Yes, it is, but, as Donna said, you could have it today and then you run out tomorrow and that’s not very helpful, so probably my advice to the Secretary of State, please promise less and deliver more. Yeah. just promised promise less and deliver more. Yeah. Just promised less and deliver more. just promised less and deliver more. You ran Just promised less and deliver more. You can have the numbers and You ran have the numbers and figures. The You can have the numbers and figures. The question is if the delivery is lagging behind what is required then ask again the industries in this country to work all the hours that God gives them to deliver this PPE to those who need it and also that it must be appropriate to the person. I’ve got a friend who is a nurse, where she was given a mask but it was far too big and it didn’t quite do the job in the end, so make sure that the equipment is appropriate to the person who is doing this and make sure there isn’t a supply that runs out. So, promise less, deliver more. Yvette, we have had one tweet in here, we have had quite a lot on PPE, but one which struck me... Why PPE, but one which stmck me... why is there no PPE, but one which struck me... Why is there no PPE available anywhere for carers coming into vulnerable people’s homes? This is the area that I am most worried about, the position for social care, that means position for social rare, that means peopla going position for social care, that means people going into people’s homes, peopla going into people’s homes, but people going into people’s homes, but also in care homes as well. I but also in rare homes as well. I have but also in care homes as well. I have heard from carers who are really worried because they go from one home to another, they’re really one home to another, therre really worried one home to another, they’re really worried that they might be spreading the virus inadvertently, as well as being worried about having the proper protection if they are caring proper protection if they are raring for people proper protection if they are caring for people who are ill. 50, I think for peopla who are ill. So, I think the social for people who are ill. So, I think the social care side to me feels one the social rare side to me feels one of the the social care side to me feels one of the most urgent to increase. Also, that I think when you’re dealing with something where you need enough PPE for sometimes thing moving very quickly, then you need oversupply in each area, in each community. So, oversupply in each area, in each community. 50, US saying nationally, community. So, us saying nationally, we might have enough totally if we get all of the logistics right — get all of the logistic right - actually get all of the logistics right — actually we need much more than that, in order to have the leeway whenever it is needed. We had our [oral hospice at whenever it is needed. We had our local hospice at the beginning of [oral hospice at the beginning of the week, local hospice at the beginning of the week, somebody got in touch because they were worried that they were going to run out of PPE within were going to mn out of PPE within 24 hours were going to run out of PPE within 2A hours and might have to discharge 24 hours and might have to discharge patients. 2A hours and might have to discharge patients. Everybody pulled round, all of the other bits of the local all of the other bits of the [oral NHS all of the other bits of the local NHS made sure that they could provide the PPE, and we also had suppUes provide the PPE, and we also had supplies from the local FE College, everybody pulling together. It is really uncomfortable to having the last of the local FE College for last of the [oral FE College for some last of the local FE College for some of the supplies that they need, that does not feel like that is the “Y that does not feel like that is the way we want to be running things, way we want to be mnning things, but it’s a great way we want to be running things, but it’s a great example of everybody pulling together. But if you had enough in each area to be able to manage that, then that would be easier. And I think when we are at a time, when it comes to social rare, for our at a time, when it comes to social care, for our carers and also our rare, for our carers and also our NHS staff, they care, for our carers and also our NHS staff, they are having to do the most incredible thing is, they are having to save lives, to care for having to save lives, to rare for those having to save lives, to care for those who are dying, to face this horrible virus, really, the least that we can do is to make sure that that we ran do is to make sure that they have the that we can do is to make sure that they have the protection that they need. That example is a very good one. St—Pierre school, which is a one. St-Pierre school, which is a pub“: one. St-Pierre school, which is a public school, one. St—Pierre school, which is a public school, because children have gone home, they really dedicated and gave all their PPE to your hospital. -- to York gave all their PPE to your hospital. —— to York Hospital. The whole lot. -- to York Hospital. The whola lot. -- St Peter’s. —— to York Hospital. The whole lot. —— St Peter’s. And that was a -- St Peter’s. And that was a fantastic help. —— St Peter’s. And that was a fantastic help. But in the end, please, Secretary of State, production has got to work overtime, in order that, as Yvette Cooper said, actually, there is enough not just for today but for the following two weeks, three weeks, four weeks. And get all the factories to do the same. Burberry is now producing gowns and using its supply chain to get masks in. All of that kind of thing, let’s get masks in. All of that kind of thing, let’sjust gear up get masks in. All of that kind of thing, let’s just gear up and get all of those parts of our industry supporting our NHS as well, because I think people really want to. And I think peopla really want to. And we have I think people really want to. And we have to recognise that if we don’t provide for social care or in don’t provide for social rare or in the community, don’t provide for social care or in the community, it will don’t provide for social care or in the community, it willjust put a the community, it will just put a burden the community, it willjust put a burden on the hospital. We represent nurses both in the independent sector, in the community, and social rare, sector, in the community, and social care, and there are carers that also rare, and there are carers that also need this care, and there are carers that also need this equipment, otherwise we will burden the hospitals and not be able to look after people in the able to look after peoplo in the community. able to look after people in the community. And we will need to do that, because we will reach capacity in hospitals very soon, so we have got a number of other questions, one that has just got a number of other questions, one that hasjust come got a number of other questions, one that has just come in online, got a number of other questions, one that hasjust come in online, and it that has just come in online, and it says, this is that hasjust come in online, and it says, this is mainly for you, Matt, of course, we’re delighted that you are here with us, and recovered... It says, should the UK align its advice with the WHO guidelines that people with Covid—19 can still be infectious for M days after recovering? Donna is going like this conscious you are back here after seven days, so why the difference? You might not be surprised to hear that I did check this before coming out of self isolation. Surprised and relieved?! And the clear medical advice from the Chief Medical Officer, who has looked into this, is that the transmission tends to stop before seven days, and seven days is the appropriate amount of time. Donna is looking rather sceptical. I am very sceptical because I think the evidence is unclear about whether you’re still carrying, after the seven days. Well, this is an important point, that I continue to behave as if, like everybody else, it is not that because I have had it, I have a free pass now. I self—isolate the same as pass now. I self-isolate the same as anybody else. pass now. I self—isolate the same as anybody else. So it’s important that peopla who anybody else. So it’s important that people who have been through it, we don’t yet have the science to know that they are immune and completely dear. that they are immune and completely clear. That science isn’t clear, as dear. That science isn’t clear, as you say. But clear. That science isn’t clear, as you say. But they advice on coming out of self isolation after seven days is something that we went through with great rigour with the Chief Medical Officer. But it is an interesting point, so, if you’ve had it, after seven days, you should still effectively self—isolate, social distancing we should all be doing that anyway...? Yeah, when the science is good enough to understand the immunity that people have after the immunity that peopla have after having had the the immunity that people have after having had the disease, then we are looking at introducing something like an immunity certificate, or maybe a wristband, that says, I’ve had it and I’m maybe a wristband, that says, I’ve had itand I’m immune and I can’t had it and I’m immune and I can’t pass it on and I had itand I’m immune and I can’t pass it on and I and highly unlikely to catch it. And we think that we will be able to get there. But as of today, the scientists are not confident enough in understanding the progress of the disease after people have got through it, like I peopla have got through it, like I have, and people have got through it, like I have, and so therefore, the advice remains executive same. It’s one of these areas, and there are lots of them with coronavirus, where we are them with coronavims, where we are living in a world of them with coronavirus, where we are living in a world of uncertainty, where the science is not yet clear. Donna is certainly agreeing with you on that! Literally, we know that you have an antibody to the virus, that you had. But whether you can be re—infected or not is not clear, the re-infected or not is not clear, the science is re—infected or not is not clear, the science is not clear on that. Do you think the science is clear on the 1A think the science is clear on the 14 days versus the think the science is clear on the 1A days versus the seven days? Do you think the WHO is wrong to say 1A think the WHO is wrong to say 14 days? Here, I think the WHO is wrong to say 1A days? Here, Ifollow think the WHO is wrong to say 1A days? Here, I follow the think the WHO is wrong to say 1A days? Here, Ifollow the Chief Medical Officer very precisely, and he has looked into it in great detail and made the decision about seven days, and I asked exactly that question. And also whether you should take a precautionary approach on it if it is not clear? That’s right. We had exactly that discussion and he went and looked at the best science and made that decision must I would like to take a couple of points now, I am going to take two consecutive points from two peopla. I take two consecutive points from two peopla. Ilost take two consecutive points from two people. I lost my dad over two peopla. I lost my dad over two months ago people. I lost my dad over two months ago from pneumonia. My 85-year-old months ago from pneumonia. My 85—year—old mum has underlying 85-year-old mum has undertying health 85—year—old mum has underlying health conditions and falls into the vulnerable category. She is self—isolating and unable to have self-isolating and unabla to have contact self—isolating and unable to have contact with most of her family. I haven’t seen her for over three weeks. Being separated from us is having a negative impact on her mental well—being. Are you able to mental well-being. Are you able to tell me mental well—being. Are you able to tell me with any certainty when I will safely be able to see her again? Earlier will safely be able to see her again? Earlierthis will safely be able to see her again? Earlier this week, will safely be able to see her again? Earlierthis week, my will safely be able to see her again? Earlier this week, my wife again? Eadier this week, my wife lost her again? Earlier this week, my wife lost her nan to Covid—19. She was lost her nan to Covid-19. She was fortunate lost her nan to Covid—19. She was fortunate enough in one of her final few moments to have one of her daughters at her bedside. I know this has not been the case for every this has not been the use for every family. A lovely this has not been the case for every family. A lovely tribute was paid to her on the front page of a Kidderminster newspaper today. How ran we Kidderminster newspaper today. How can we support those who are in ran we support those who are in grieving and can we support those who are in grieving and self isolation at this time? john, grieving and self isolation at this time? John, we’re hearing so many, time? john, we’re hearing so many, frankly, time? John, we’re hearing so many, frankly, heartbreaking stories of peopla who frankly, heartbreaking stories of people who have lost their life peopla who have lost their life partner and people who have lost their life partner and then in the loneliness of that position, have to be even more alone, self—isolating, or more alone, self-isolating, or families more alone, self—isolating, or families who can’t mourn together? On the BBC News at Six o’clock, they had a story of a rabbi who died, and he had been married with his Wi—Fi he had been married with his wi-Fi think he had been married with his Wi—Fi think about 60 years, and she couldn’t go even to the funeral. The undertaker had to do the funeral. What I have not fully understood, if undertakers handle the bodies and undertakes handle the bodies and are able undertakers handle the bodies and are able to take those bodies to be cremated, or to be buried, why in this particular case didn’t they this particular use didn’t they allow this particular case didn’t they allow at least the son, who is quite young, to be present, and numbers restricted? And I think what is going to be haunting her restricted? And I think what is going to be haunting herfor the going to be haunting her for the rest of going to be haunting herfor the rest of her life, I think, they had been married and never separated, I could not visit him because he had Covid-19, and could not visit him because he had Covid—19, and even in death I wasn’t Covid-19, and even in death I wasn’t allowed to go to Covid—19, and even in death I wasn’t allowed to go to the burial grounds. I find that difficult. But I think the government has got to think this one through, because people who... And I ran one through, because people who... And I can understand why they don’t And I ran understand why they don’t allow peopla And I can understand why they don’t allow people to visit, because of the virus, but I don’t understand why a family could not be by the graveside, or in the crematorium, provided the numbers are restricted. And if people are just simply buried And if peopla are just simply buried and then And if people are just simply buried and then later on, when it is all over, you go and see the grave and you 5“- over, you go and see the grave and you say, I wish I was there. So, peopla are you say, I wish I was there. So, people are grieving doubly. Not peopla are grieving doubly. Not being people are grieving doubly. Not being allowed to be present when they die. And I think that is very, very difficult. I think the restrictions, for example, that there should be no funerals in churches, I think that is a right decision, and people being buried or cremated, but can the Secretary of cremated, but ran the Secretary of State explain cremated, but can the Secretary of State explain why, if undertakers State explain why, if undertakes handle State explain why, if undertakers handle the body, put it in a coffin, handla the body, put it in a coffin, then take handle the body, put it in a coffin, then take it to the crematorium or the burial ground, why a member of the family, with clear social distancing, could not be present? Well, it’s heartbreaking and we back more and more people who have known more and more peopla who have known somebody who more and more people who have known somebody who has died, and it’s more and more people who have known somebody who has died, and it’sjust somebody who has died, and it’s just awful. somebody who has died, and it’sjust awful. There’s two people I was very awful. There’s two peopla I was very fond of awful. There’s two people I was very fond of have died, and it’s starting to have that impact. In response to this precise question, John, your this precise question, john, your instincts this precise question, John, your instincts are right. We have guidance for funerals that was put together, including with an ethics together, including with an ethis panel which together, including with an ethics panel which includes representatives of all the major faiths, panel which includes representatives of all the majorfaiths, and panel which includes representatives of all the major faiths, and that advice doesn’t say that families, dose advice doesn’t say that families, close family, can go to a funeral. close family, ran go to a funeral. So, I don’t close family, can go to a funeral. So, I don’t know the specifics of So, I don’t know the specific of this So, I don’t know the specifics of this individual case, but we must this individual use, but we must make this individual case, but we must make sure that that guidance, which rightly, as you say, says that the numbers shouldn’t be large, that that guidance is followed, and I can that guidance is followed, and I ran only think that that guidance is followed, and I can only think that the wife might have been in the right category, which means that for her own protection, she should not see anybody or leave the house. But if we need to make that clearer in the guidance, then that dearer in the guidance, then we that clearer in the guidance, then we absolutely will. And maybe we could talk about it afterwards, because decisions like that, of course, have to be based on the pub“: course, have to be based on the public health advice, but really need to be taken by faith leaders need to be taken byfaith leaders making need to be taken by faith leaders making recommendations, alongside the epidemiologists and the doctors, to make sure that we get this right. So, I to make sure that we get this right. So, Ithink to make sure that we get this right. So, I think that the advice clearly So, I think that the advice dearty needs to So, I think that the advice clearly needs to be explained more clearly, needs to be explained more dearty, even if needs to be explained more clearly, even if the circumstances are, as you 5“- even if the circumstances are, as you say, from that example, and let’s try to fix that. Coming back to to the question from Govita, whose 85-year-old to the question from Govita, whose 85—year—old mother is now a widow, 85-year-old mother is now a widow, having lost her 85—year—old mother is now a widow, having lost her husband, she is 85, she has to be shielded, so she’s all alone in her home, and for a number of people who are tragically in that situation now, how can they find situation now, how ran they find comfort situation now, how can they find comfort in this situation that we all find ourselves in? all find ourselves in? Well, my mother eventually died of cancer and I was by her bedside for seven days. I think in this particular case, if I think in this particular use, if that was my I think in this particular case, if that was my mum, I can hear the that was my mum, Iran hear the guidance that that was my mum, I can hear the guidance that you shouldn’t take the infection there, this is why I think testing is important. If I am tested and I know that I haven’t got the virus at all, I think I would go and be with my grandmother. And then not leave the home until everything is clear, because you could actually dear, because you could actually infect clear, because you could actually infect other people. So, I actually infect other peopla. So, I actually think infect other people. So, I actually think the guidance in terms of raring for the think the guidance in terms of caring for the relations is quite raring for the relations is quite important. caring for the relations is quite important. Again, Donna was right, communities are working hard and it is in those communities, this particular virus could actually spread widely if people are not tested. 50, I spread widely if people are not tested. 50, Iwould spread widely if people are not tested. 50, I would be spread widely if people are not tested. 50, Iwould be screaming tested. So, Iwould be screaming with my tested. 50, Iwould be screaming with my hospital that I need a test, so that if I have not got it, I must go and spend the rest of this self exclusion with my relative. You’re right, because she, her exclusion with my relative. You’re right, because she, herworld is right, because she, her world is cmmbling in right, because she, herworld is crumbling in all kinds of ways, and cmmbling in all kinds of ways, and how ran it crumbling in all kinds of ways, and how can it be brought together, how ran it be brought together, other how can it be brought together, other than a member of the family getting the test and be unable to go getting the test and be unabla to go and getting the test and be unable to go and spend time with her, until the government removes these reductions? Let me ask you about this one, we have had a message in this point from someone... I am so disturbed that peopla are from someone... I am so disturbed that people are dying from Covid—19 that peopla are dying from Covid-19 in isolation, that people are dying from Covid—19 in isolation, without any family. Is it not possible, she goes on to say, to give PPE to at least one family member so that patients don’t have to die alone? Not in any sense underestimating quite what a challenge that is for nurses, I mean, when we heard about the 13-year-old mean, when we heard about the 13—year—old boy who died, I have to 13-year-old boy who died, I have to say, I 13-year-old boy who died, I have to say, Icried 13-year-old boy who died, I have to say, I cried when I 13—year—old boy who died, I have to say, I cried when I heard that, the thought of a child dying alone is just unbearable. Is there anyway around it? ii It wouldn’t surprise you that nurses are thinking about this. I popped into the XL earlier this week to into the XL eartier this week to talk to into the XL earlier this week to talk to nurses about how they are doing end—of—life care and they are doing end-of-life rare and they are thinking about doing end—of—life care and they are thinking about how they can have thinking about how they ran have family thinking about how they can have family members communicating. We’ve had donations of mobile phones so that actually nurses can talk with that actually nurses ran talk with the that actually nurses can talk with the patient’s’ relatives that actually nurses can talk with the patient’s’ relatives as they are delivering the patient’s’ relatives as they are delivering care by the bedside but delivering rare by the bedside but it’s why it’s delivering care by the bedside but it’s why it’s so important that we ramp up the manufacturing of PPE because actually then you can start because actually then you ran start doing things because actually then you can start doing things like giving it to peopla doing things like giving it to people that can go into the homes, peopla that ran go into the homes, if people that ran go into the homes, if they are people that can go into the homes, if they are adequately protected. So, of if they are adequately protected. 50, of course it’s not if they are adequately protected. 50, of course it’s notjust the So, of course it’s not just the health So, of course it’s notjust the health care worker that may need it health rare worker that may need it but actually health care worker that may need it but actually when somebody is in isolation and actually it’s affecting their mental health we may need to do something very different. Yvette? . Sorry, John is yellow your Yvette? . Sorry, john is yellow your hospital has Yvette? . Sorry, John is yellow your hospital has started giving patients who are in isolation iPads and iPhones so they can get in touch iPhones so they ran get in touch with iPhones so they can get in touch with their relations and of course then after it’s used properly disinfected, and I think this should be the way of assuring people that be the way of assuring peopla that they ran be the way of assuring people that they ran get be the way of assuring people that they can get in touch with their they ran get in touch with their loved they can get in touch with their loved ones and then they can loved ones and then they ran actually loved ones and then they can actually see their faces and see them and without that actually you are almost isolating the person and then when they don’t see their body being buried again you are creating another heart wrenching exercise so -- another another heart wrenching exercise so —— another heart—rending exercise. -- another heart-rending exercise. So get in touch —— another heart—rending exercise. 50 get in touch with some clergy who So get in touch with some clergy who may be in touch with chaplains in hospitals, like in York, they get in touch with the clergy and tell the person how they are doing, and this needs to be a sort of community exercise in which we make it possible if you are able to communicate to do it safely and then they will know where the illness is taking this people. But to die alone taking this peopla. But to die alone and not taking this people. But to die alone and not knowing since you went in there is very difficult fuzz. there is very difficult I think it’s important to say most nurses don’t allow peopla important to say most nurses don’t allow people to die alone. Certainly allow peopla to die alone. Certainly if allow peoplo to die alone. Certainly if you are in allow people to die alone. Certainly if you are in hospital you will have a nurse, it’s not the same as your family, but most nurses are very conscious of that. One of my own stuff, her mother recently died and she described the way in which people bent over backwards to facilitate her ability to communicate with her mother and she was a nurse but she was really grateful in her hour of need that actually we did facilitate her being able to communicate with her mother before she died. 50, it is able to communicate with her mother before she died. So, it is possible. We just have to before she died. 50, it is possible. We just have to find innovative ways of doing it because both shielding individuals that might be vulnerable but also stopping the spread fuzz but also stopping the spread fun yet I think but also stopping the spread fuzz yet I think nurses are doing an amazing job to do that and we are very grateful but it’s one of the cruellest things about this virus. cmellest things about this vims. It’s not only cruellest things about this virus. It’s not only leaving people to die It’s not only leaving peopla to die without It’s not only leaving people to die without their family around them but also leaving people to grieve on their own as well, so I think the starring effect, their own as well, so I think the scarring effect, the emotionally starring effect, the emotionally starring scarring effect, the emotionally scarring effects of this crisis, however long it takes us to come through this, are going to be huge for medical staff that will have worked in these environments, but also for worked in these environments, but also forfamilies worked in these environments, but also for families who will have lost relatives without being able to be with them and it feels that we need to also be investing in what those support services should be for families in terms of dealing with those bereavements and as we increase the testing, given what Matt said about the testing, I think we should look at whether the sum of those community tests could be prioritised for those who have lost loved ones so that you don’t end up with a widow who has lost her husband and then her daughter can’t even go round to visit. If both mum and daughter could just be tested and then they could be together in order to grieve. I’m going to move on very quickly but I wanted to read you this tweet that has come in from Tracy Sturgess. My you this tweet that has come in from Tracy Stu rgess. My greatest you this tweet that has come in from Tracy Sturgess. My greatest worry is if my child, who has additional needs and a potentially life limiting illness, should he become ill he wouldn’t understand why I couldn’t go with him to hospital and it would break me and him. In this circumstance could I go to hospital with him? Lots of things to think about there. Let me get this last point it if I ran, about there. Let me get this last point it if I can, we’ve just about point it if I ran, we’ve just about got time, on a point it if I can, we’ve just about got time, on a different subject. From Richard Tums. Good evening. As a retired police of his what are the panel’s views on how the police are currently enforcing social distancing and how can they complete distancing and how ran they complete this distancing and how can they complete this difficult role whilst at the this difficult rola whilst at the same this difficult role whilst at the same time continuing to police by consent? Yvette, I wanted to ask what you think about, there’s been some controversy about some of the things police forces are doing. I think the police are in a difficult position because everything is moving so fast. The regulations coming on the Thursday and they immediately need to be enforced and that’s an inevitable consequence of the pace this is all moving. They have been some examples where I think therve have been some examples where I think they’ve been miss have been some examples where I think they’ve been missjudgments think therve been miss judgments made think they’ve been missjudgments made all the police have not got the balance right, but overall I think the approach of placing an certainly senior police officers that’s been reflected in the national guidance reﬂacted in the national guidance we’ve reflected in the national guidance we’ve now seen is that enforcement is a last resort, the police’s role is a last resort, the police’s rola is to is a last resort, the police’s role is to encourage, is a last resort, the police’s role is to encourage, to engage. Most people really want to abide by the regulations. Most people want to do regulations. Most peopla want to do the right regulations. Most people want to do the right thing because this is about our health. The police want to do the right thing. It’s important that it is done in a proportionate way. It’s done in a way that supports the community. Our tradition in this country has been policing by consent. Working in the police with the community, that’s what they want to do. In Knottingley what they want to do. In Knottinglay [oral police what they want to do. In Knottingley local police officers were delivering lunches for a lunch club that has closed yesterday afternoon, that’s the spirit of policing we want to see. Andrew Stephenson says there’s too many cars on the road, peopla are there’s too many cars on the road, people are driving on them to go out peopla are driving on them to go out I haven’t people are driving on them to go out I haven’t seen checkpoints or police anywhere in the Medway towns. What anywhere in the Medway towns. what is your feeling anywhere in the Medway towns. What is your feeling about the role of the police so far? I would agree with Yvette Cooper that there are some examples that are not very good, but on the whole what I’ve seen on the media is that actually some police officers are courteous but they make it very clear they but they make it very dear they should but they make it very clear they should still not be moving around unless they are really doing something that is important and necessary, just going about is not good enough really. We haven’t experienced this country, in this country of the police being given such powers but they are limited and they are going to be reviewed and I want to encourage all my fellow citizens, please follow the government guidance and if the police talk to you courteously they are not wanting to take away your liberty or freedom because this is a tragedy for all of us and because it’s a tragedy, behave in such a way that all you ran it’s a tragedy, behave in such a way that all you can do is do no wrong. that all you ran do is do no wrong. Do no wrong to that all you can do is do no wrong. Do no wrong to yourself or anybody else. I just Do no wrong to yourself or anybody else. Ijust hope that the chief constables reinforce the message that actually the first of your role that actually the first of your rola is to that actually the first of your role is to persuade, is to encourage and fines are really a last resort. Don’t go there very quickly. This lady was talking from York to Newcastle and given such a hefty Nemsﬂa and given such a hefty fine, I’m Newcastle and given such a hefty fine, I’m going to find out what happened, I don’t think that gives us a good place. On the other hand there is some people who don’t take seriously that this is a deadly virus which could kill any others so please for the sake of yourself, your neighbour, your please for the sake of yourself, your neighbour, yourfriend, your your neighbour, your friend, your children, your your neighbour, yourfriend, your children, your community, stay at home, you know? And protect the lives of other people. We’ve had a lives of other peopla. We’ve had a tweeting from lives of other people. We’ve had a tweeting from Chrissie Crellin, I’ll get your comment, Matt, she says it was commented on the other day that vehicle use has increased, the police on the radio confirmed the same day that you can drive to somewhere close by to go for a walk. somewhere dose by to go for a walk. Is this right or somewhere close by to go for a walk. Is this right or not? It seems to be a daily argument online. People are a bit confused about that kind of thing. Overall the number of people who are following the rules is very, who are following the mles is very, very high and I who are following the rules is very, very high and I agree very strongly with what Yvette said that policing by consent is the way we do it and I think some of the stories in the media have been a bit overblown and weren’t quite what they first were reported as. I think that being able to go out and take exercises important. The key thing is always to come back to the original public health reason is that the advice is to stay at home, which is to not come into close contact with other peopla. So, to come into close contact with other people. So, to get in your car and peopla. So, to get in your far and drive a people. So, to get in your car and drive a short distance to then go for a walk on your own or maybe with your dog, that is fine because you are not coming into contact with another person and the advice is really clear about that. We do want peopla to really clear about that. We do want people to take exercise because I really am worried about the mental health concerns that we discussed already and we know that exercise is good for your mental and physical health. So, good for your mental and physical health. 50, follow the rules, stay health. So, follow the mles, stay at home, health. 50, follow the rules, stay at home, that protect the NHS, and it will save lives. Do take exercise, but, when you do it, don’t go near anybody else who isn’t in your household. Matt, you have made it clear. Our hour is up. I’m pleased to say Question Time is back next week and for the foreseeable future at 8pm. This evening our recorded questions came from rugby. Next week we are looking for questions from people who live in questions from peopla who live in and questions from people who live in and around Uxbridge. To take part in the programme go to the Question Time website, applying the usual way and we’ll ask a number of you to record your questions and record your questions and send them in, just like this evening. If you want to have your say you can go to want to have your say you ran go to Adrian want to have your say you can go to Adrian Childs and guests on Question Time Extra Time on five live now. I want to say thank you very much to the panel, Matt, John, thank you for the panel, Matt, john, thank you for joining us from the panel, Matt, John, thank you for joining us from York. I wasn’t clear how it was going to work but I think it’s worked brilliantly so thank you so much. Thank you to everyone who recorded a question got in touch duﬂng recorded a question got in touch during the programme and to you at home for watching. For now, stay well, stay at home. From Question Time, bye-bye.