Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Matt Hancock, Conservative minister since 2013. He joined the Cabinet as Theresa May’s Culture Secretary, before being appointed Health Secretary just over two years ago, a post he held onto when BorisJohnson became party leader. Labour’s ShadowJustice Secretary and MP for 20 years and minister in the government’s of both Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, David Lemmy. Immunologist and professor of mucosal infection at Imperial College London, where he leads the effort to find a vaccine for coronavirus, Robin Shattock. Joining us down the line, Merryn Somerset Webb, a finance and economics commentator, journalist and editor in chief of Money Week, and comedian, writer and guest on shows such as The Last Leg and Eight Out of Ten Cats, Rosiejones. Good evening, welcome to my guest here in the studio. Merryn, welcome to you, joining us down the line from Edinburgh, very good to see you, and our live audience is with us again. Very good to see you via video link. Tonight you’rejoining us from Dover, thank you very much for doing that. And for those of you joining us from home, dojoin in the conversation on social media, @bbcquestiontime and the usual way. And before we get going, Ijust want to say we are going to do things a bit differently to begin with. We have had a lot of questions about the vaccine that we all hope is going to get us out of this situation, so we are going to do quite a number of questions quite quickly to you, Matt, and then of course, for the rest of you on the panel, if you want to pitch in, please do, and of course you there, please do, and of course you, the audience in Dover. There is going to be a lot of questions coming your way to begin with before we move onto other topics. So, let’s have ourfirst question from Mark Reynolds. So, my question is, how many people need to have the vaccine before it would be successful? Now we have heard that there is going to be some vaccines possibly before the end of the year, but it is going to be significantly less than we need. How many people need to be vaccinated for it to be successful? Yes, what percentage of the population are we talking about? Well, the honest truth to that question is that we don’t yet know. It is one of the many things that we don’t yet know about the vaccine, and the reason for that is that in the trials that the vaccines undergo, you test for how effective they are protecting the individual, and also of course how safe they are, and if they are safe and effective then we can start to roll them out. And the early date from the Pfizer vaccine shows that it looks like it is 90% effective at protecting individuals, so that is great, so as soon, or if it passes the safety data, and, you know, that is a big hurdle that it still has not gone over, then we can start rolling it out and it starts protecting people as soon as they have had it, a week or so after the second dose. But what you do not know at the moment is whether it needs to be 50% of the population or 70% of the population, you are still not there. Because the evidence from the trial is how much it protects an individual, and you can only find out, once a lot of people have taken it, what the direct impact is on stopping the spread of the disease. Because this particular vaccine, Robert, we don’t know if it stops people catching coronavirus, but we do know that it stops them, or stops 90% of them, getting sick from it. Yes. It is really early. We know that it prevents people developing disease, for a period of time that it has been studied. We don’t know whether it will protect people for six months, 12 months, and we have no information right now as to whether it will prevent transmission, so that means its first priority is actually to use it to protect vulnerable populations. We have a question exactly on that from John. Can the government confirm that if and when the vaccine is approved, it will be distributed strictly based upon clinical needs? Yes. That is our proposal. We have a committee that is made up of clinicians and experts that advises me, as Health Secretary, in my formal capacity, theJoint Committee on Vaccinations and Immunisations, and this group looks at the data from a vaccine, and they have been working closely with Pfizer and AstroZeneca on the two early vaccines, and it works out what is the best clinical way of protecting most people, and they have put out an interim recommendation, which is that first we should vaccinate people who are resident in care homes and the people who work looking after them, and then health and social care workers and then, essentially down the age range, because for all the different things, like obesity, that we know has an impact on your vulnerability to disease, we know that your age is the single biggest factor by a long stretch, and so, the answer, very simple answer to your question, yes, we will vaccinate according to clinical priority, because that is how we save the most lives. John, is this of particular concern for you? Is that why you have asked the question? No, I have asked the question because I am obviously the oldest person here this evening on the virtual panel, probably in the whole audience, but obviously I would be one of those down the line to be affected, not in the first tranche, but certainly I am well over 70 now, so I would be fairly close to that. I personally, I have heard of quite a few people who are scared of having the vaccine, but I personally would not even hesitate having it, because I know a lot of people who are very scared at the moment, simple as that. And, Rosie, is it clear to you what someone in your situation might get the vaccine? No, not really. I know you have mentioned care workers and what about people who still need to work, what about teachers, what about people who work in supermarkets? Where in the line do they come? Yes, so the clinical priority is all about protecting people according to essentially their risk from the virus, and so after we have gone down to the over 655, according to the proposal on the data that we have seen, and they may update it as we see more information, then you go to those who are particularly vulnerable from all age groups, and then after that down to the over 505. Once you get below the over 50s, there is less of a clinical justification for any particular... What do you mean, below the over 505? Well, the people who don’t have an illness which makes them particularly vulnerable to coronavirus, who are aged between 18 and 50, they are the least likely to die from coronavirus, and so the clinicians who have advised me on this expert panel say that they come after all the people who are either older or work in health and social care or who have a particular vulnerability, and unfortunately we know quite a lot about who is vulnerable to Covid because of having looked at who has been badly affected over the last nine months or so. The head of the Vaccine Task Force says that she was anticipating only 5096 of the population would ever get a vaccine. This was before the Pfizer announcement was made, so is that your anticipation as well? It sounds like it is, from what you are saying? No, not necessarily. We have learned more and more about the vaccine as time has gone on and the latest advice is that we should go in the order that I have described and then to the under 505, but not to children, because this vaccine has not been tested on children, it is not designed for children and anyway children are very, very unlikely to get ill from coronavirus. I think two things, one, you didn’t mention Britain’s black, Asian and minority ethnic population, which we know are disproportionately dying as a consequence, and I hope that they are part of the group. There are other front line workers, other than care home workers There are other front line workers, other than care home workers and nurses, and we can’t have one way, the head of the Vaccine Task Force saying 50% and then one week later, the Secretary of State for Health saying, no. Is it less than 50% or is it more than 50%? Well, we will get to, I hope, should a vaccine come off, and of course it is still uncertain, we will get to more than 50%, and that is because we have learned more about the details of both the virus and the vaccine. In a week? No, the comments that you referred to were some time ago. And the expert body who advises us has published its interim recommendations a few weeks ago, and then it will publish the final recommendations when we get the final data about the vaccine, about any vaccine, it should it be both effective and safe, and those are the two absolutely critical things that we will look at. And if people can pay for it, will they get it more quickly? Well, I don’t think that that is going to be possible. Well, I don’t think that that is going to be possible. So does that mean that the government is going to buy up all the doses, and so people will not be able to go to a private doctor or what have you and say, "I would like that"? It may not be in this particular phase, or they may not be eligible for the government guidelines, but "I can buy it, so therefore I can have it?" I don’t foresee that, because it has been hard enough buying this as a government... As those who have developed the vaccine have done and have been with governments, so we have bought, on behalf of the whole UK population, and we intend to roll—out, according to clinical priority. Let us take another question from Joe Craft. Yes, good evening. Is the storage and distribution infrastructure in place to guarantee the viability of the vaccine? This is complicated, isn’t it, because you need these super freezers, that keep it at —70 degrees. Yes. The Scottish Government, I know, has already bought some of these super freezers. Yes. Are you going to be able to pull this off? Yes. You sound very, very confident. I remember you coming in here and saying that about PPE, in the very early stage of the first wave. So, come on! On PPE, I remember sitting in this chair and explaining how difficult it was... Yes, but you also said that we will have it sorted at that time by the weekend. And we got there. But on this, the NHS is in charge of distributing it and we are... The UK Government is buying this vaccine and the other back The UK Government is buying this vaccine and the other vaccines and it is important we have a portfolio, that we have several and we are buying them for the whole UK, and then the NHS in each country, in England, Scotland and Wales and Northern Ireland is responsible for the deployment. It is a challenge, it is incredibly difficult. In fact, I would add one more challenge, Joe, you talked about the distribution and the storage, there is one other really hard part, which is the manufacture, which in the case of this vaccine that Pfizer are doing, but these things are hard to manufacture. You know... You are not responsible for that. What you are responsible for is making sure that people can get it. I will come onto that, but you have got to think, they are hard to do the science, they are then hard to manufacture, this thing, it is not a chemical that is made, this is biological. Then it arrives and you have to keep it at —70, and we have come out, the NHS, we have known for some time, so the NHS has been getting hold of the serious deep freezers and then you have to distribute it and it will be a huge effort from the NHS. They are supported by the armed services in doing that. Now, thankfully, the NHS is a very significant organisation that has reaches into all parts of the country. So, the reason I answered, when you said, are you ready to do it, it is something we are working on every day, it will be complicated, it will be a huge challenge, but I am sure that the NHS is up to it. I mean, I think we need to recognise there has been enormous excitement about this vaccine, because it is the first evidence that it is a vaccine preventable disease, but that does not mean that it will be the only vaccine, and I think what is encouraging is, if we also believe the news that is coming out of Russia, we will see a series of vaccines coming through, which may have different advantages for deployment. So, right now, we have to act as if this is the only vaccine that is going to work, but we could have a very different conversation in two, three or four weeks’ time, and I think it returns to this issue of prioritisation, it is a difficult vaccine to get out, there are about 10 million vulnerable population, and if you started vaccinating inJanuary, given that it takes 5—6 weeks to get immunity, and you did 1 million people a week, we would not get that 10 million vaccinated until way into April, and that is assuming that everyone comes in for their first shot and for their second shot and you are not playing catch up, so the logistical problem is immense. That does not mean that people should be off the hook, but it is to understand that challenge, and that is why we need to prioritise the way the vaccine is rolled out. Ellie. Hi, good evening. So, are we aware at all of what sort of other countries are doing in regards to the vaccine? Is there much liaison going on with the World Health Organization, because obviously China was the first affected, and how far have they advanced in terms of coming along with a vaccine? Is there much, you know, communication there? Let me get a few questions and we will put them to Matt and possibly to David as well. Marie. Hi, I was just wondering whether the government could foresee any potential supply issues after Brexit at the end of the year and whether that would coordinate any transportation issues with the vaccine coming into the UK? Well, I think we might come to that point in a moment, so I am going to park it, but it has obviously been one of the big issues. Eamon. Yes, I guess it is more of a statement than a question, but I think that Matt is really underestimating the massive challenges that we are going to have with the supply and distribution of this product, because I have seen first hand with the flu vaccination campaign, this flu season, we have had massive issues with pharmacies running out of stock, using up their stock quite quickly and not been able to replenish that stock. GP surgeries being out of stock for having to wait for more than a month to get new stock in, and the flu vaccine is something that is much, much more straightforward, Amy, you are saying that as a pharmacist, it is worth just repeating the words ofJohn Vale from Oxford University who predicted, with some confidence, he said that life could be back to normal by spring, with the big caveat, provided they do not screw up the distribution. Ijust want to respond to Eamon’s point, because I totally agree with him, and as a pharmacist, you will have seen this, the question I was asked was, can we do it? And my answer to that is, yes, we can. Well, the question was, is the storage and distribution infrastructure in place to guarantee it? Is this going to be an enormous challenge? Of course! This will be one of the biggest civilian operations in history, and I think it will have all the challenges that Eamon set out, but I think that the NHS can rise to them, and I think that we can come together and we can help make it happen. So, I am confident that we can make it happen, and I am also highly confident that it is going to be extremely difficult, and also one of the biggest logistical exercises that this country has ever seen, and you are right, there have been huge challenges in so many parts of the response to this coronavirus, huge challenges, and we have learnt a huge amount all the way through, and it hasn’t been easy, but, you know, we have got through so many of those challanges in the past. I am sorry, Matt, but it is just a bit facile when you say things like, yes, we can. The point is that we have heard there have been problemsjust getting out the flu vaccine this year, and we have still got to do more, obviously, because flu runs with us right into the spring, we know that you blew 500 million on PPE that did not work. We know that it is now nine months and 12 days since the first infection in York, and we still, in the sixth richest economy in the world, have not got a successful Test, Track and Trace system, and so, in the end, this is about public confidence. We need people to believe and to take the vaccine, but I think you are being asked, can you do it, given that these freezers are, you know, —70, are necessary to get this distributed, and you can understand why people are slightly nervous that we are going to be well into the summer before this vaccine is properly rolled out. All I would say is that it is not can I do it, can we do it? Right? This is something that we, as a nation, need to do, together with the NHS obviously in the late... Well, hang on a minute, that is all very well... No, no, no, everybody coming forward to be vaccinated, everybody participating, in the same way that with social distancing, that is something we all need to do and, yes, absolutely, this is doable. I am not saying it is easy and I am not saying it will be straightforward, I am just saying, we have got to do it and we will get it done. I think it is very easy to say, it is all of us, no, it is up to you and the government to lead us and to give us the answers that we are not getting. As a member of the country that I love, I am worried and scared because I am not getting any answers. Ask the questions and we will try to answer them. One of the challenges of the pandemic is there are all sorts of questions that everybody wants an answer to. All right, well, let us take some more from our audience. Donna. Thank you. A recent survey found that around one in six British people were unlikely to agree to being vaccinated against coronavirus. What, in your opinion, in the opinion of the panel, is the best way to reassure the public that the new Covid—19 vaccine will be both effective and safe? Before you answer that, Matt, can Ijust see if there is anyone in our audience who is hesitating about taking the vaccine? Who is not that sure about it? Who have we got here? Kay. Yeah, Matt, hi. I am concerned, because I do not believe there has been adequate time to put the vaccine through the rigorous testing that we would expect it to go through before being given to the general public. What do you say or not? And Ellie? I would agree with Kay, especially when you look at previous things like thalidomide and things like that, you know, are we really fully aware of, you know, the side effects that could come along with the vaccine? Jay, I know you had some reticence about taking the vaccine as well. Yeah, I have got to say, I do agree with Matt completely, because we are in an unknown pandemic at the minute, so there are going to be a lot of unknowns coming up for us, so I think staying positive, looking to the future. I mean, during the start of the pandemic, we had all those volunteers, apply for helping out. If that can happen again, who knows what can happen, I suppose? Would you be happy to take the vaccine, Jay? I am probably one of the cautious people, to be fair. I would rather wait and see what the effect is, first of all. Imean... So at the moment, you are not sure? And, Merryn, you wanted in. Yeah. I just wanted to say that there is a big trust issue around vaccines, and looking at the different surveys, you can see, depending on the surveys, between seven and 25% of people will say that they are generally quite suspicious of a new vaccine like this. So there does need to be some kind of campaign around the safety and the reminding everybody of the accuracy of the vaccines that we have had over the last couple of hundred years. It is really important to remember that back in the 18005, you know, 20 or 30% of kids died before they were five, and we have put in place a vaccine programme since that one, and a couple of hundred, but around this idea of trust, there is probably a very simple way to make the general population believe in the vaccine and trust in the vaccine and perhaps, at the same time, to increase a little trust in our politicians, which obviously has fallen off quite substantially over the last nine months, and that, I would suggest, that Matt, you have the vaccine first and then every other MP has it and then we can roll it out to a couple of top civil servants as well, so once you have all had it, there is an element of trust and that, we wait two weeks, everything is fine, then you can start rolling it out to everybody else. So, you want to wait and see basically if Matt does not drop to the floor, frothing at the mouth, kind of thing, before you take it, Merryn? That would reassure the population that it is absolutely fine. Well, I would take the vaccine as soon as I am allowed to. But what about taking it just to kind of encourage others? I would be happy to do that, the problem is that we’ll be putting me ahead of the queue in terms of clinical need. Now, because I work in the Department of Health, I can’t, as it happens, as a health care worker, so if my taking it, when health care workers are allowed to take it, so notjumping the queue, if that would persuade a single other person to take it and give confidence to others, then I would be absolutely happy to. Shall we do a totally unscientific straw poll? Put your hand up in the audience if you think Matt should be one of the first to take it. Quite a lot, but not unanimity. Daniel is nodding his head there vigorously. Robin, I know, because I have spoken to some of our audience members already, before we came on, that quite a few of them are very happy to take the vaccine as soon as they can get it, and we have already heard from John to that effect. Some people are a little bit more worried about it. I think it is a really important point, and actually, Jay’s position, to say "I am going to wait and see what happens" is probably a common response. I think we need to remember that actually vaccines, next to clean water, have been the single most effective public health implementation globally. They have saved more lives than any other medicine, and the people are concerned about this vaccine because they perceive that it has been done too quickly, and actually we have done a disservice in saying that it takes ten years to make a vaccine. Technology is changing very, very quickly and what has happened is that the same number of participants have been exposed to this vaccine, this particular vaccine, 43,000 participants and when you are looking at side effects, most of the side effects occur very quickly, within one week or so of having a vaccine, we would see any severe side effects at this stage and no regulatory authority, whether it is the UK medicines regulatory authority or the European regulatory authority or the FDA will let anything go through that does not have a totally squea ky—clean safety record. Now, one thing that I think people completely forget is that a vaccine stimulates your immune system, it tricks it to see if it has seen the virus, so you are getting an aspect of a viral infection, that is so much minor than the real virus, so when you think about the risk benefit, the risk of having a severe outcome from Covid—19 for outweighs any theoretical risk of a vaccine and the problem is vaccines are so successful that diseases go away and all you see is the side effects. Pour out any medicine, paracetamol, we have probably all had it, and look at the potential side effects of paracetamol. If you had never taken before, it would probably scare you to take it, but you don’t have the same concerns, because you are familiar with it. And I think the way we will build confidence is when we roll it out to vulnerable populations, who are desperate for a vaccine, to get their lives back to some sort of normality and we see it protecting lives and we see it being safe, I am sure people like Jay will start to see the evidence speaks for itself. Stewart, you have got a question. Good evening, panel, yes. For those that are not in the initial bracket to receive the vaccine, will they still need to abide by the social distancing or even face the potential of going back into lockdowns as well? Yes, how is this going to work, Matt? Will there be a section of the population who can go party, while everyone else has to wait, or how’s it to work? Because at first we don’t know whether, even if you have had the vaccine, you might still transmit the disease, that means that we can’t lift those measures on just the people who have had the vaccine, because you still might give it to someone else and what we have to do is vaccinate to protect the most vulnerable and then get to the position where enough people have had it and we will of course monitor afterwards, as we vaccinate the population come out to find out the impact on the transmission of the disease. All of this is about how to get life back to normal as fast as possible and the reason, another reason to do this in terms of clinical priority, to your point earlier, is that the faster we can vaccinate those who are most vulnerable of dying from Covid, the sooner we will be able to start to get life back to normal for everybody else as well. So, this is another of those questions that at the moment is unknowable, but the plan to roll out, according to clinical priority, is the best way to get, as fast as possible, to as much back to normal as possible. Merryn, as far as business is concerned, this is the time frame they desperately need. When will businesses be able to open up and operate normally again? That would be an absolute game—changer, just the knowledge that there will be a vaccine by spring and let’s say that most vulnerable people and people have been vaccinated by late spring, then I am sure Matt might have a different opinion of it, but I would think that the majority of the economy could open up properly and if businesses know of the economy could open up properly and if businesses know that they can move out of this appalling cycle of not knowing what is going to happen, of hyper regulatory activity, lockdown this, tier this, curfew this, rules all over the place, up, Down, up, Down, up, Down, never knowing exactly where they are, if they can start looking forward to a future that is linear, where things don’t change all the time, then they can start moving their businesses around to make them work again. So, in that sense, it is an absolute game—changer for business and that is why you saw these astonishing moves in the stock market on Monday when you saw effectively all the companies that are geared into the return of normal life, airlines, pubs, etc go completely berserk and all the stocks that are geared into the nightmare that we live now, like working from home, etc, fall very significantly, so it means that the economy has finally started to look forward to, as I say, something a bit more linear, less choppy. Andy, you have had your hand up for a while, but you have also got a specific question that I know you wanted to ask. Yeah, so I will cover both of that in order. There is a priority list, NHS workers, health and social care workers, etc, I wonder where the unpaid carers are that are sort of the unsung heroes, caring for family members, where they are in this priority list, because they don’t seem to be mentioned nationally? Let us just find out. Are they going to be in the priority list? Defining the social care workers... These are sort of unpaid carers. Yes, but my goodness, they may be unpaid,... I’m not downgrading what they do, I am saying will they be in the first wave? Well, theJoint Committee that advises me will define exactly how broad that category is. Would you like to see them in there? I would like to follow the clinical advice. I know I am not giving an answer and I think that is because I think it is really important that we follow the clinical advice. Andy, why don’t you put the question that you have prepared as well. Transport, post Brexit, is key as we rely on the vaccine being expedited through customs and other such barriers, how will we ensure the Brexit post January importation of the vaccine does not have an impact on Covid, the two don’t be sort of playing against each other with swaying priorities? This is something that came up from a lot of members of the audience, actually. Look, we were told by Boris that we would have an oven ready deal. We have no deal, we have Boris putting the Good Friday Agreement on the table, which jeopardises that deal, we have got the Chief Executive of the Port of Dover saying that a no—deal Brexit could cost us, I think it was a billion a week, and that traffic ﬂows could be down by between 40—60%. The clock is ticking, we are running out of time and it is now looking worrying that we will have no deal with the European Union and we will have no deal by the way with the United States of America, because we would have risked the Good Friday Agreement by having that no deal. Look, it is desperately important that we get a deal, that it is frictionless trade, that it does not involve tariffs, that we have got food safety, we have got health safety, that we have not got queues and lorries backed up and I suspect a lot of people, in an area like Dover are really worried, because a lot of promises were being made and we wait to see what will happen, but we know we have now got days, days, to deliver this, against the backdrop days, to deliver this, against the backdrop, and just remember, a lot of people were saying, look, this is tough, we have got all the European countries dealing with this pandemic, we have got all European countries dealing with the economic consequences, let’s have a little extension, while we work this out. IF} We’re going to have a deal. We’re going to put the Good Friday Agreement on the table. It’s a mess, but we need the deal. Over to Matt Hancock. Hang on, before we get to Matt, Donna, I know there was something you wanted to add into this particular subject as well. Yes, absolutely. On the lst of January, 2021, will Dover become a well oiled gateway to Europe or the biggest car and lorry park in the world? And it all plays into the same thing, doesn’t it? A, what is going to happen the end of December, but also in terms of us getting this vaccine and getting it through customs, is that going to be a problem? Is this something that you thought about, Robin, is this a concern for you? We haven’t thought about this directly in terms of what the immediate priority is, but we certainly recognise, in the UK, particularly as we go through Brexit, that we need to really ramp up UK manufacturing capacity, so that we can make vaccines and we have the cutting edge technology in this country and I think one of the things that we recognise is, from a pragmatic point of view, we have made, the government has made purchase of six vaccines, five of those are from overseas. That is actually increasing our reliance on overseas production. You are involved in developing a vaccine as well at Imperial College. We are one of the two UK teams developing a vaccine. Are you getting funding from the government as well? We are getting funding from the government, but it is still requires a huge effort for us to build a technology from scratch and to give the kind of examples of the competition, there are 30 R&A companies around the world. This is the particular technology that Pfizer have used? It is a new technology at a tipping point and our competition, our direct competition, are two companies in Germany, one of which is BioNTech, and they got grants from the German government of 350 million and 250 million apiece, even though they are well funded, and so we need to think in terms of the strategy as to how we are going to nurture a vaccine industry, which is more thanjust start—up, that is sustainable and has a long—term strategic plan. Are you getting those kind of sums from the Secretary for Health? We are getting support and we fully anticipate that the government will want to see the two flagship vaccine programme is being supported to the hilt. Daniel. Picking up on the Shadow Justice Secretary’s point, will the defeat in the House of Lords of the clauses of the Internal Market Bill on Monday have any impact on government policy, especially with a President—electJoe Biden? Antonio? Hello there. My question, in fact, is for Matt. Matt has mentioned that there are several companies, several deals going on regarding the vaccine and I just want to know, these pharmaceutical companies that are involved, will make an enormous amount of money. My question to Matt is this, does the government have any strategies in place to ensure that these pharmaceutical companies give back to the system from their profits, to ensure that everyone in the UK who wants the vaccine can have it, rather than being held to ransom for what they can produce and what the government wants to pay for the vaccine? Justin. Sorry. Sorry, while this announcement is welcome, does Mr Hancock think it goes anywhere near to placating an increasingly apathetic population who, for the last nine months, have been drip fed a series of failures and costly failure and double standards. Joe. Yes, I think the answer given that the NHS will be able to manage the roll—out and the NHS will do it, the NHS relies on subcontractors to do the job of rolling it out. Recently, the vetting has suffered and I have also heard rumours that there are simply not enough medical grade vials or lorries around in order... Or even PPE, for the roll—out of this vaccine, so to say that the NHS will do it, well, the NHS can only do it if they get the support in order to do theirjob, so, you know, it would be a monumental waste of money to buy the vaccine... and it becoming effective. Well, lots and lots of different points there and I am going to drag us back for a moment, to the original question, which came from Andy, about confidence, about getting the vaccine through. Yes. Post the end of December. Are you utterly confident... We have heard all sorts of warnings from road hauliers, about not being ready, about hold—ups at Customs, you know, lorry parks and all the rest of us, or are you confident that that is not going to be a problem? We have a plan for the vaccine which is being manufactured in Belgium and, if necessary, we can fly it in order to avoid those problems. It is a lot more expensive than getting it through on a lorry, isn’t it? Well, the importance of this vaccine cannot be underestimated, so we have got a plan for all eventualities and many of the points that were made, some of the excellent points about some of the challenges, like Joe’s point about the fact that vaccinators needed PPE, absolutely that is a critical part of the plan. So, it underlines how this is a hugely complex project, but it is one that we have been preparing for for some time. So, you are confident that Brexit, if we do leave the European Union without a deal, is not going to hold up the delivery of the vaccines to this country? I am confident of that, we have a plan for all of these eventualities, yes. Rosie, I think you wanted to come in. I have just set here, increasingly getting annoyed because I think we are hearing great points and you’re taking the easy questions and sharing one answer and then moving on. I wanted to come here today and talk about the vaccine and feel reassured that we are going to go into 2021 and be in a much better and safer place and I don’t know if we will be. I absolutely think there is a point at which this vaccine that we heard about on Monday, it is good news, but we are not there yet and there are still a lot of steps that we need to get through. So, I am only going to reassure you and anybody else as much as I can be confident about. You’re not reassuring me at all. Well, lam being honest about the uncertainties that we still face and I think that is what I am duty—bound to do. There are some things I am more confident about, like, for instance, we have done the work to make sure we have the —70 capacity... Can you even tell us when people might first get the vaccine? Well, we are planning that if all goes well, including the safety coming through and including the manufacturing going well by Pfizer, we are planning to be able to roll—out from the start of December, which is not long. One of the co—founders of the company that is manufacturing this vaccine said, not before mid December, so you are not quite on the same page. Well, as I say, we are planning to be ready from the 1st of December, but we are not guaranteeing that by any stretch and, you know, it would be easier, you know, in the moment, for me to say, no problem, all sorted, we are just not there yet, though, but what we can’t say is that we are making progress towards where we need to be, but there are many, many hurdles for us still to go over. Merryn. I just wanted to work on reassuring Rosie a little bit, because I think we are talking about the vaccine at great length, which is incredibly interesting and very exciting and gives me enormous hope that we are at the beginning of the end of the whole thing, but we are not talking about the various treatments that have been coming along as well, so while we wait for the vaccine to be rolled out and for everyone to get it, there is also a cheap steroid that is working quite well, there is a UK based company that is in place to use trials in using a drug that is known to be very cheap working in different illnesses that could work very well and it has been shown in a clinical trial, so it is not just about the vaccine, it is also about the fact that we know there are very good treatments there, we know that death rates have been falling during the second wave over the first wave, in older people in particular, we know that the mortality rate as a whole is very low and we are also learning more and more about how and where it translates and I am sure we will then get onto whether lockdown is a good idea or not later, but we know for example that you don’t normally get Covid when you’re out shopping, for example. So, you know, we are beginning to know more and more about how we can live relatively normal lives with good treatments, regardless of exactly when the vaccine is rolled out or not. Merryn, you haven’t had a chance to answer the question about trying to get the vaccine through if we leave the EU without a deal. I leave that to Matt because I’m sure there are ways of getting back things through long lorry cues, but I am sure that the government has organised, but the wider question is presumably about Brexit and whether there will be very long lorry cues in Dover if we go through with this on WTO terms under specific FTA and the answer to that is there probably will be very long queues in Dover, but there will probably belong lorry queues regardless of whether we have a deal or not, because all change that involves lots of pieces of paper and admin and new types of organisation results in difficulties and hold—ups and blockages, but that will, I would guess, only last two or three months before we come out the other end and that will be unpleasant for the people involved in it, but if you believe that Brexit is a good thing for the country long term, it will end up being a relatively small price to pay, I hope. Let’s take another question now on a different topic from Jamie. Hello, panel. So, having had a Disability Discrimination Act for a 25 years, are we now treating people with more respect and equality? Well, Rosie, I’m not trying to pigeonhole you here, but I’m in, in a sense you are the obvious person to answer this. Ican’t imagine! But, give us the benefit of your experience. So, the disability act came in in 1995, I was five years old, and without a doubt, my life has been better because of it. I had an education at a mainstream school, I went to university, I got a job and with by cerebral palsy, I have been a successful and independent human being and I am proud of who I am and I can’t ground—breaking disability act. Saying that, we are 25 years on and whenever I walk in the street alone, I wear headphones, because of how I walk and I talk, I get abuse on a daily basis. I am not alone and not. I am not alone and not I have had times of unemployment, unemployment is huge amongst disabled people. I have tried to apply forjobs and I have been hung up on because of how I speak and I am not alone, because right now a quarter of a million disabled people are unemployed and because of Covid, that is rising. I was going to say that disabled people are overlooked, but they are not, they are deliberately ignored, because disabled people need more care and more money and I don’t feel like, as a disabled person, I am getting the care and support I made right now. David. Well, I mean, it is hard to follow that. And that was very moving to listen to. Look, I suspect of course there has been progress over the last 25 years, but we have got a long way to go. Let me just say, I have three children and one of them has sort of educational special needs and I know the struggle of parents in this country when they are trying to get a statement. Of course there is still huge discrimination in employment. I was thinking of the young black man dragged out of the Oxford Union, blind, just a year or so ago. I think that there is a lot to do in this country and we probably have to return to the legislation that is required. If you look at that story of the 20th century, it is a lot of people at the beginning of that century, certainly the disabled, anyone with educational needs, black and brown people, women, working people, all oppressed in some ways, put down and by the end of the 20th century, beginning to get their rights. But we are still on thatjourney. And as we go into a deep recession, we know that the people who can be deeply affected or those with disabilities and, let me just say, if you defund local authorities like we have in this country, if you have got local authorities like Croydon or Northampton going bust, with budget cuts of 50%, where is the money for adult social care that the disabled depend on? Where is the money for the kit and equipment that people need in their homes? All the money being cut in day centres, right across the country? So it is not a rosy picture, in some ways it feels like a rollback and I endorse what has been said. Robin. I mean, I think the point is that in terms of either being overlooked or deliberately ignored is something that society continues to need to be challenged on and disability comes in many shapes. Visible disability often leads to abuse, but also I am very conscious, one of my daughters has a chromosome abnormality and she has no physical disability, but she is disadvantaged by a hidden disability and I think that is also a problem, a hidden problem that people don’t necessarily recognise. I think it is so critical that individuals like yourself, Rosie, challenge the rest of society repeatedly. The fight needs to go on and we can never be relaxed and not challenge ourselves, whether it is disability or any type of prejudice. Merryn. I haven’t much to add to that to be honest, except to say that from what we hear, there are not that many families in the UK but are not in some way touched by the difficulties of having someone with a disability inside theirfamily. Obviously, there is a lot more to be done to help everybody without, but I would also say that we must not underestimate how far we have, over the last 25 years. Everybody now understands, which I don’t think they did then, that lack of access to transport, to buildings, to education, to employment etc was a travesty and now it is considered to be something that everyone should have access to. So, there has been huge change over the last 25 years, obviously there is a long way to go, but we must remember how far we have come as well. Merryn, I was quite surprised to learn that rules on accessible public transport came into force on buses and coaches from the end of this year. So many years after the Disability Discrimination Act, rail replacement buses, for example 60% of those are not accessible. There are quite a few hands up. Emily. Thank you. I just want to applaud Rosie on that, but also I want to raise an issue that was just mentioned about SEN and children struggling in schools. The delays in diagnosis of neurodifferences at the moment is over three years in most areas, including Kent, and Covid is only going to increase that delay. The Disability Discrimination Act give us the right to education, there are lots of children that are not able to access education because they are still waiting for a diagnosis. What is going to be done about that? Donna. I think we need to remember that anyone of us can become disabled at any point in time. So, when we are supporting an increase in access for disabled people, we are actually supporting ourselves. We are supporting the entire country. So, I think, looking at this as just issues for disabled people is I don’t think it’s helpful, it is about how do we increase access for all of us, including disabled people. That is how I think we should look at this. Daniel. Is it a matter of adding new legislation or becoming a lessjudgmental society? Matt. Well, I had admire you so much, Rosie, for the way that you articulate this and I thought what Emily said was so strong, in a small way, I am neuro diverse, I am dyslexic, and it took me until I was 18 until I was diagnosed and then I got the support I needed and it made an enormous difference to me. But I was lucky, because I was able, I was essentially able to get by on my maths, despite the fact that my language skills were very poor, my written language skills at school. So, I have feltjust a tiny bit of what that feels like, but I think that Daniel’s point is so important, which is of course legislation is important, and that is something we should always be pushing forward, like with the change in the bosses at the end of this year, I did not know about that, I think that is really important, but my God, how long has it taken us to get to this point? But it is also about society accepting everyone and looking for the good in everyone. I think that everyone has something to contribute and we need... It is our task, our mission is to go and find what is good in people and the contribution they can make and bring it out and support people to do that, so I think there is a long way to go. Rosie, we are almost out of time, I just want to give you a final word on this. I think I would kick myself about talking about the change between the DLA Disability Living Allowance to the personal independence payment, because 650,000 disabled people, including myself, got caught and this just makes me insanely angry that I thought when I was assessed in 2008 that money that kept me going, that gave me support, it was taken off me and luckily I can work harder, I can push myself, but a lot of disabled people are now on the poverty line, because they were assessed by a stranger for ten minutes who would look at them and go, what do you need? Thatjust makes my blood boil and I want to end it by going, stop ignoring disabled people. We make up 22% of the population. We are here and we are worth listening to! Rosie, look at that. If there were people here at the studio with us, you would hear the applause. You can only see it. There you are. I wanted to give you the final word on that Rosie and I am very glad I did. Ourtime is up. Tonight our questions came from Dover and next week we will be joined by an audience in Windsor and the week after that, Swansea, so do get in touch. You are what makes Question Time what it is, so do get in touch if you would like to be part of our virtual audience. I do hope that you will. You can apply by going to the Question Time website and there is an online form there for you to fill in. Adrian Chiles is coming up as always on Five Live now with Question Time Extra Time with his guest so you can carry on the conversation. For now, thank you very much to the panel. Merryn, thank you forjoining us from Edinburgh and of course to our virtual audience, from Dover, thank you and thank you at home for watching. From Question Time, bye bye.