Tonight, we’re in West Bromwich. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Steve Barclay, Chief Secretary to the Treasury and former Brexit Secretary under Theresa May and Borisjohnson. Labour’s Shadow Policing Minister, former shop steward and a special constable with the Met, Louise Haigh. Pete Wishart, the SNP’s Shadow Leader of the House and MP for nearly 20 years and, before that, keyboard player with Celtic rock bands Big Country and Runrig. John Ashton, former Regional Director of Public Health in the north—west of England, he was also Professor of Public Health at Southampton University and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. And managing director of the high street supermarket chain Iceland Foods, Richard Walker. APPLAUSE. Welcome to our panel, to the audience here and, of course, you are at home. Do join in the conversation, you know how to do it now, on social media, @BBCQuestionTime. Right, it’s been quite a day, quite an afternoon, lots of news coming out. Let’s start, our first question, with Matthew Grocott. Every European country seems to be taking pro—active action in regards to the coronavirus pandemic. Is our government doing enough? Steve, I’m going to start with you, since you are the Cabinet Minister on the panel. BorisJohnson says this is the worst public health crisis for a generation. Many families will lose loved ones before their time. Is the government doing enough? Sure, well, it’s a moment of concern, I recognise, for many people and we will be guided by the experts, by the science and by the facts. And that is very much in forming the approach we are taking. We are being open within government with that science, so the Chief Medical Officer for England, Professor Witty, for England, Professor Whitty, who is leading our response, is in close contact with his counterparts across the United Kingdom. Across the political parties, we are working constructively together, meeting through the COBRA system to coordinate our response and it’s right that our response is calibrated to the needs of the United Kingdom. So it is the case, other countries sometimes do things differently. For example, Italy was testing passengers on flights to China, where there were questions as to whether the UK should be doing the same. Can I ask you about Ireland tonight? We have this unusual situation now where Leo Varadkar says their advice is that they should restrict mass gatherings of more than 100 people if it’s indoors, 500 people if it’s outdoors, so you’re going to have a situation where, on one island, you’ve got one government following their advice, which is very different and, just over the border, people cross that border all the time, in Northern Ireland. Yes and I think there is a specific issue in terms of Northern Ireland, also because of the Common Travel Area. So why is their advice different to our advice? Well, in terms of mass gatherings and sporting events, I think if you looked at the footage of, for example, Paris St—Germain last night, you saw football fans actually congregating outside the stadium which had been closed to supporters. Often, if you close sporting events, people then will watch them in the pub and so the science doesn’t say that, actually, the risk is greater if people go to the stadium but it is something... But Ireland knows all that as well, so why are they... I’m just using them as an example, lots of countries have taken the decision to introduce social distancing and close down public gatherings. I’m not saying the government is wrong, I don’t know, but I’m just wondering why other governments are saying their advice is telling them differently. And I think it’s a fair point, and I think the key to the advice that we have government is it’s about the timing of measures and what is best suitable to the country concerned, and so the approach, the advice we have, is it’s about what measures we take but also at what time we deploy that. 50 things like sporting events, working under review, but the advice in terms of the circumstances we face, the models that have been done, is that the time of the measures we take, that that isn’t the appropriate action for the United Kingdom and, above all, this is driven, as I say, by the scientific advice and the models that is informing government policy. And, indeed, that is an approach being taken across the United Kingdom. Louise? Well, let me say that we have been completely supportive of the Government’s approach, which is putting the Chief Medical Officer and the Chief Scientific Officer out there and let it be medically and evidence led, that is absolutely right. It is of note that we are seemingly out of step with our closest European neighbours and, therefore, I think the onus is on the government to explain why more aggressive measures for social distancing or closures of large events are not being, are not taking place. But I think the overriding objective must be to allow anybody who needs to self—isolate, to ensure that they do that and that they can afford to do that and that is a particular challenge in the UK because we have the second lowest level of statutory sick pay in Europe. Only Malta, across the whole of Europe, has a lower rate than we do, so for workers on minimum wage, we are asking them to make a choice between hardship and their contribution to public health, sacrificing as much as £200 a week in order to stay—at—home. For millions of workers, they don’t make the minimum income threshold in order to qualify for statutory sick pay and for millions more on zero—hours contracts or who are self—employed, they don’t qualify either. I don’t understand why this wasn’t addressed in the Budget yesterday, because this has to be the most pressing concern, so we will support the government, we are begging the government to take action on this, to make sure that it is available from day one for all workers and brought in line with average pay to allow more workers who need to self—isolate. The public health crisis is about to expose really big shortcomings in our social safety net and I worry that, if the government doesn’t take this action now, both they and we will come to regret it for some time. There are a number of issues when it comes to how the government is tackling the coronavirus pandemic. That’s certainly one of them, I think we’re going to come back to that later, if you will forgive me. Just for now, John, I want to come to on Matthew’s question. Every European country seems to be taking proactive action and, also, other countries around the world. Is our Government doing enough? I don’t know where to start with you. I mean, I’m embarrassed by the situation in this country. You know, there is talk of four stages and we are now moving on from the containment thing. We’ve lost the plot here. You know, we haven’t taken the action that we should have taken four orfive weeks ago. So what do you think we should have done? BorisJohnson should have convened COBRA at the outset, when it became clear what was cooking up. The countries that took firm action at the time, if you look what happened in Hong Kong and Singapore, which had a lot of cases initially but which took firm action and they got the thing under control. We’ve lost control here. Last night, I didn’t go to Anfield last night because, you know, I had second thoughts about it. 3,000 supporters came to Anfield last night from Madrid, where they are playing football behind closed doors. The virus is around in Madrid. That virus has been shared around Merseyside last night, in the bars and clubs of Merseyside. The virus is, no doubt, now among us. For reasons which are totally obscure to me, we’ve taken it as policy not to track the people who have come back from Italy, not to test the people who have come back from Italy, so the virus will now be amongst us and the Government’s approach has been paternalistic, it’s been old—fashioned, it’s been top—down and it’s not done what needs to happen now, and we’ve lost four or five weeks, which, if we get the epidemic that looks like happening, then it’s going to be a community issue to be dealt with by the community and the community needed to be put in the driving seat and supported, because there is no way in which very sick people are all going to be able to be admitted to hospital. They will have to be nursed at home. The public will have to organise itself to do that. What is beginning to happen in West Yorkshire and in Greater Manchester is that groups are forming up to do self care, to help each other to be able to do this. The Government should have been facilitating this from the outset and they haven’t done it. We’ve had a very narrow, technocratic approach, which has not got its head round the social dimensions of this. We have learned nothing from Ebola. With Ebola in 2014, we lost three or four months because we took a narrow science—based approach to this and didn’t understand the community aspects that related to the burial practices of folk in Sierra Leone, where they really needed to engage with the women’s committees because they needed to change the burial practices. We’ve got to achieve cultural change here and that cultural change can’t be done to people, it’s got to be done with people. You know, the closure of grounds, the closure of schools, will need to happen, it should be done on an informed basis depending on where the cases are. The Government’s failed to divulge the information that the public needs, to know whether their area is one where they need to start taking action or not. We’ve been kept in the dark. 50% of the population now goes to university and they are being treated like peasants and it’s time we had a change of approach. Steve, obviously, Iwill come back to you on this but there are a lot of hands. I want to get around the audience. Yes, the man there in the pink T—shirt. I’ve got a few things I want to bring up here. The first one is I’m very worried, my wife’s got a heart problem and it’s terrifying to think that my kids could bring the coronavirus home. The other thing is, the professor touched on, people coming from Europe into the country. My daughter’s school had a group of children go to Italy only a few weeks back and they spent half a day or a day in school, touched things, coughed, they have been in school, the teachers and the children and they refused to clean the school at the start. I didn’t want to send my daughter to school because she comes back, she catches the virus, she passes it on to the siblings, siblings go back to another school, pass it around and it’s very scary and worrying for me. So do you want the school to be closed, is that what you are saying? Yeah. I’m worried. If my wife, who’s got a heart problem, if anything happens, is BorisJohnson willing... He said on the radio today that the Health Minister... Who was it? Nadine Dorries, who’s been diagnosed... They said they don’t want to stop the virus, they want the virus to carry on, so they get the whole... Oh, I see, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance, the... I can’t remember who, I heard on the radio. ..scientific medical experts. And, right, 0K, BorisJohnson said that we will lose more people. I’m not ready to lose my wife because of that. So, you know... CHEERING AND APPLAUSE. Yes, the man in the cotton shirt, yes, you, sir. I agree with the professor. For example, people are coming in and going out, and nobody is tested at the borders. Even in my country, Ghana, where we haven’t got anybody yet, people are tested when they are coming in, people are tested when they are going out. You allow everybody in. And then you tell them, isolate yourself. Why can’t you stop them at the borders? I think the Government isn’t doing enough. OK, the woman in the sari, with the glasses. The children are less vulnerable in school so what is the point of closing the schools? Particularly for doctors and nurses. They need to be in the hospitals. If their children are not going to school, they might ask their elderly parents to look after them, and they are in the vulnerable state, so it’s like... It is a little bit of a cycle, really. We need to think hard before we say, like the Irish Prime Minister, close all schools, because we need our doctors and nurses to be helping the people who obviously are going to be needing a lot of help. 0K, let me get one more point. Since I arrived here this evening, I have received a phone call from my father’s care home, which is local to hear, to say they’ve now closed to the home to visitors, in light of the announcements today. I am really concerned about what will happen to care home residents, nursing home residents, if the staff are. .. ..go sick and self—isolate. I can’t go in and care for my dad because I’ve now been told I can’t visit. You can’t go and see him at all? No. Pete, you’ve taken a different view in Scotland. 50, Nicole Sturgeon, the First Minister, came out this evening and said that, from Monday, gatherings over 500 people are going to be banned. So, why are you doing that and the rest of the UK is not? There is a very good reason for that. First of all, I want to say we very much agree with what the government is doing in its approach to the problems around coronavirus. It is a four nation strategy that we’ve totally bought into, and I think the actions of the government have been appropriate and they’ve been disciplined and measured. And I agree with so many of the points that have been made there. There’s so much conflicting advice about this, so many countries are doing different things, and they’re doing things to meet their own population and cultural requirements. I think what we’re doing here in the UK is the right way. There’s even a dispute among some of the academic staff, there is another professor I could quote, Keith Hall, who says closing schools is a bad idea because what that does is put risk to older generations. If we do that, it’ll be an issue to do with people getting to the workers and looking after children. So we’ve got to make sure we follow the best possible medical and scientific advice. I am on the House of Commons Commission so I get access to some of this information, and they’re saying that what we’re doing just now is the correct and response, and if we make big population interventions, we’ve got to do it at the right time to make sure it has the best and most positive outcome. We’ve come to a point, Fiona, about the groups of 500, we are doing that not because of any scientific or medical advice. It’s the same across the UK. They are saying there is no need to do this. But we are doing this to ensure that staff who might have to facilitate events of more than 500 people are available on the front line to tackle the virus. I think that is a measured response that should be taken. From Monday in Scotland, no events over 500 people... So, why do you feel you need to do that in Scotland? Is it you have a particular issue in Scotland with front line staff compared to the rest of the UK? Not at all. So why are you doing this? We are doing this because we think everybody who is available should be on the front line, ensuring people are assisted, but why have some events like that where it will take people away... Should England be doing that, then? That is entirely up to England. This is chicken and egg. At the height of this epidemic, if it unfolds as it looks as though it may, somewhere around 12—25% of employees will be sick throughout the whole community. We will have to cover that. What I would like to have seen is the Government encouraging, as we did when I was working in Cumbria when we had the swine flu, encouraging families and communities and workplaces to have their own plan to be able to keep the show on the road. What they’ve done in Hong Kong, who had a lot of cases initially, is that they’ve moved over to home working for all public servants, unless they really have to be in the office. And ﬂexi—working and encourage the private sector to do that. The education of the children is carrying on online in China and in Hong Kong. We live in the internet age. Where is the imagination? APPLAUSE. This is the country that’s decided that through Brexit it can deal with the world. And we can’t get our heads around using social media, the internet, and so on, to keep things going, when we are faced with this crisis. We are, you know, living in the 19th century when we need to be in the 21st century. Richard. APPLAUSE. I totally understand everyone’s concern at the moment and in the same way that, you know, it’s incumbent on me to say people shouldn’t be panicking, they certainly shouldn’t be panic buying, there is enough food... There isn’t enough hand sanitiser, though, is there? Where is all that? I’ve tried all week and I can’t get it anywhere. There is no shortage of production of hand sanitiser, it’s just getting it to the shops quickly enough because then people buy it, the shelves empty, and we are putting it on the shelves the following day. I think we all have a responsibility to play in that, to shop responsibly. But, in the same vein, in regards to communication, I think the Government also needs to be very clear, from my perspective, businesses’ perspective, up until last week, communication was nonexistent from government, and I’m pleased to say that it has got better now. We are now having daily calls as a business community, as retailers, with DEFRA mac and the Secretary of State... Can I just ask about that nonexistent communication with Government because we had a Secretary of State for Health here last week, who said words to the effect that the Government was in talks with the supermarkets, and there was a bit of a hoe hah the next day, those supermarkets saying no, it isn’t. Was he in talks with you? No. We employ 25,000 people, we are not insignificant but, no, the dialogue has certainly sped up. It would be good if they could coordinate amongst the devolved administrations as well. Because we are also having the same calls with Wales and Scotland, and it would be good if they had a senior Cabinet person reporting direct to Boris to actually look across the whole gamut... Communication has been dire. I’ve heard today of one of the public health consultants, I won’t say where or which one, said she had had three letters from her gym about what to do about coronavirus. She hadn’t had a single letter from Public Health England. She had had three letters from the gym. Communications from Public Health England are dire, and they’ve been dire for seven years. Let’s hear a bit more from the audience as well. What we’d like to see is more sharing of the modelling, in terms of how do they think this thing is going to spread, where and when, and the sequencing of the delay phase and potential phases after that. That’s very important for us so we can plan and manage our workforce and also for our cash flow. Let me hear a bit more from the audience before I come back to you, Steve. The man here in the purple tie. I think it is clear is going to be the biggest thing in our lifetime, make no mistake. I came back from a cruise ship in the Far East three and a half weeks ago, and the guidance back from the people who obviously, we went back into the country with, through the airport, was zero. We had no checks. This was when? This was 3.5 weeks ago. We’d been in Singapore, we had been in Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam. At Heathrow Airport, there was zero checks, no forms to fill in, we got to the passport control, I thought they were going to ask us whether... Where we had been, it was electronic passports. I went to Bahrain two days ago and I had exactly the same experience. John, I must let... It’s great to have you but I have let you talk a lot, I need to get other people in as well. Yes, the man with the dark T—shirt and glasses. I think you’re missing one fundamental part. We just had the budget and a substantial part of that covered this issue. I think there’s a massive... Fear in every government about their own economy. We’ve just entered a huge global shock. Every stock market across the globe has crashed. And we’ve not addressed the reasons why we are hung up on the stock markets to fund everything, from pensions and everything. Until we address what we are talking about there, I think there is a fundamental need for the Government to think about that as well as public health, to balance the two together, because if the economy crashes, I am an independent retailer, not the size of Richard. But we have had the same issue. I spent today, six hours, placing orders all over the place to do what would normally take one hour, in preparation of what was going to come out of COBRA. But the bank have been helpful, the insurance company are on board, everyone is in place but we are fortunate we can weather it. So we have made the most of it. Trying to get people not to panic buy has been a nightmare but we’ve made the most of it! I’m not going to lie! So, you’re selling quite a lot is what you’re saying! Yes, the woman at the back with the blonde hair. Returning to the closure of schools, if were talking about closing schools and having meetings in public places, how long is long enough? I think that is what is on a lot of people’s minds. One of the Government’s scientific advisers was saying, in his view, that you’d have to close because of a 13—16 weeks to make it effective. I’m not saying that’s right, that his view. Let’s hear from the woman next to you and I’ll come back to you, Steve. I was meant to fly out to India on Saturday but last night the Indian government suspended all tourist visas. Initially, it was Italy, Spain, France and Germany. Within half an hour it became everywhere else. I’ve got a friend that has just got back from India this week and he said the checks that were happening at Delhi airport were phenomenal, that they were getting screened left, right and centre. But as he arrived in Heathrow, he said nothing at all. So, very similar to the gentleman down the front. My concern is why is it always the UK that gets caught with their pants down? APPLAUSE Well... I feel slightly awkward asking, Steve, if you’ve been caught with your pants down, given you’re sitting right next to me, but what you are hearing fair is a fair degree of concern and a lot of questions people feel, even Richard here, and we’ve heard whatJohn has said, they are not getting answered. And I think it is understandable, and I could hear the concern in the gentleman’s voice, in terms of the care of his wife, and it’s understandable that people have that concern. But Pete was absolutely right when he said there is an agreed position on the science, and it is the science, it is the view of our top scientists across all four countries of the United Kingdom that is driving the position and therefore, respectfully to John, I’m afraid he is at odds with the leading scientists of the UK. Other scientists in other countries taking different views, and Ireland isn’t particularly culturally different from us. They are modelling to their model and what I’m saying is there is an agreed science position. You’re quite right in terms of the point with Scotland and the stadiums, and that is an operational issue, in terms of staffing, it isn’t an issue in terms of the science. The key issue is the science is uniform across the United Kingdom, and we are sharing that in a very open, cross—party way. There is a specific issue in terms of schools and, again, these questions are not so simple, in that if you close schools, a lot of children are cared for these days by their grandparents. Grandparents are often particularly at risk. Many parents will work in the NHS. We have overl million people working in our NHS. So there are consequences to these decisions. So far, 46 countries have announced or implemented school or university closures so far. Yes, and this comes to the issue of the timing of measures. It’s magical thinking! Magical thinking. This is the advice. As a minister who is not medically trained, I came to this evening and said I know better than the Chief medical for so, I know better than the Government scientific adviser, you would quite rightly would question... But we have gone from Michael Gove saying we’ve had too much of experts to now saying we only believe scientists from a particular bit of the story, and we are not listening to what the peoples concerns are. to what the people’s concerns are. The public are concerned. At the end of the day it will continue to be public... There is a concern amongst the public, there is a unified position... You’ve got politicians believing their own rhetoric... John, we need to let Steve answer. We’ve got to get this through! The politicians are believing in their own rhetoric and they are wrong. APPLAUSE Steve, just wait one minute. John, I know you feel strongly and we’ve got you here tonight but you do have to let other people answer. This is one of the biggest crisis facing this country for a very long time. We are not trying to shut you down, I hear what you’re saying... The politicians are believing their own rhetoric... John, stop! We have to let other people answer as well. The point was raised about airports and checks at airports, a number of people have raised that. What do you say to them? Well, again, Ithink I mentioned earlier the case of Italy, which did put in some checks and it didn’t stop the spread. So the issue is what advice have we had? The advice was, as with stadiums at the moment, that that isn’t the best approach. But it’s also about the timing and the lady talked about her elderly relative and wanting to visit and, I think again, in a way, that goes to the heart of the issue because one of the concerns we have is that measures need to be taken for an extended period of time, there is a danger that people, after a period of time, will start to not comply with that. Understandably, because you will be worried about your mum, you will want to go and see her, you won’t have seen her... This is cod science! You’ve got to let him answer. John, you have to let Steve answer, even if you don’t agree. No, wait, listen... He’s getting a lot of time. John, this is how it works. A, if I say stop talking, you have to and, B, we have to let peopla answer and then I will come back to you. I do want to hear from your view, don’t mistake me, but we do have to let other people answer. To be fair, as I say, I’ve been party to some of the discussions at COBRA. I met the finance ministers from the Scottish, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive on Tuesday. We are working across the UK, because this isn’t about politics, this is something where we need to come together, we all have a concern for our constituents but I come back to this point, it’s what the expert advice says, it’s what the facts say and it’s what the science says that’s absolutely crucial. There are lots of hands up, I want to hear some more. Yes, the man in the black shirt there. So I’ve got two disabled brothers with cerebral palsy and I agree with ProfessorJohn but I’m also really concerned about the closing of the schools and day centres and how we, as a family, will cope with looking after them. You know, especiallyjust before the holidays, we’ve put measures in place for the Easter holidays. But if we do thatjust before the Easter holidays, we are going to struggle as a family. 0K. And, yes, the woman here in the dark top. We’ve heard lots of concerns but one of the concerns is the result reporting times. It’s varying. In Belfast, it’s between five and 2A hours. Within other parts of the UK, it’s eight days. Isn’t that a concern in itself? You are worried about tests. Yes, the man in the T—shirt? Yes, you. I think, as a young person, it’s often put to me, don’t worry, you’ll be fine, because young people respond very well to the illness, but think the problem is I, as a young person, can still give the illness to someone who is very vulnerable. I think the message "You’ll be fine" to my generation is worrying, because we need to take the same steps of caution to make sure we don’t give it to our loved ones who are vulnerable and could be killed by it. That’s a particularly good point and so many issues around particularly the ageism when it comes to this issue. What we are seeing is like somehow some of our older people don’t require or deserve the care, they obviously do. There is one phrase we are going to get very much used to over the next few weeks or months, and that is "Flattening the curve". What that means is we are going to have to try a slow... We know the cases are going to rise, what but what they do is to have a very slow rise up, keep the peaks as low as possible and then a sustainable drop down. Now, Steve is absolutely right. How to achieve that and do that is based on the best scientific and medical advice. I knowJohn’s got his views on all that. It’s out of step with most of the advice that we are getting as politicians. We don’t know the answer to this. I’m not a clinician, I can’t make any decisions about this, I can’t tell you about how this disease will work out. But what I can do is to listen to the experts, to the science, and ensure that is going to be applied and adopted, because it is only by doing that that we are going to get through this. And we are only going to get through this if we do this together. And I think we also have to be honest about the challenge that is facing us, and the lady brought up about the care system and herfather that is in a care home. The head of Care England has said the Government does not have a strategy on social care and the ability of social care to respond to it and Richard comment about the failure to communicate with supermarkets is really concerning. I know of major care providers in this country that have not had any contact from the Government at all. So, yes, we need to be supportive of the Government’s general approach but we also have to be honest that there are significant challenges that I don’t think the Government have necessarily... Well, we’ve got a question on exactly that. 50, Mark Taylor, where are you? Yes. Are we doing all we can to support the vulnerable groups to help them through coronavirus? Now, you work in the NHS, is that right? I do. What is your view? For me, personally, I have got a father who is in his late 70s. I’ve got a sister who’s got a learning difficulties. My father’s now starting to not we nt to leave the house unnecessarily. He attends a social event on Monday and he is worried about going there. He had his family come down from Leeds the other day and he was worried about going to see them, so that has started to emerge within him. With my sister, there is a difficulty about understanding what advice to follow because, clearly, she will hear one thing and believe that and then hear another, so we’ve got that as well. But I think I’m also concerned about the homeless as well, because they seem to be missed out a lot here. I’ve got my own personal views but there is a large quantity of people we are missing out in protecting. Which is picking up on what you were saying, really. Absolutely. You know, I think it is maybe, it has stopped a little bit but when there was first public awareness around a virus, there was kind of a dismissiveness about, well, if you are young and you don’t have any underlying health conditions, you will be all right. Well, since when, as a country, did we not care about older people or people with underlying health conditions? So the people that you’ve just described should be our absolute priority and we should be making sure that we keep the virus away from them and if they do catch it, that there are enough critical care beds and that there is sufficient health care available for them. Those should be our absolute priority in tackling the virus. John, you were nodding and I could see you are agreeing with that. The one thing that occurs to me from what you have been saying thus far is that when it comes to commune, someone to someone like you, for example. them, how is someone like you going to be able to go to work? And care for the vulnerable? This is why we need to be encouraging neighbourhoods, communities, families, groups of friends, to have their own resilience plans about who is going to look after the kids if parents are ill, who is going to do the shopping for Granddad and all the rest of it. We haven’t had that discussion. But the vulnerable groups, you know, there has been very little discussion about that. The Government have got predictions that if you get one serious case in a care home, you might finish up with a mortality rate of up to 30%. They haven’t told anybody that. These are the sort of figures... Is that true? I’m 5 0 NW Is that figure true? It is planning assumptions that they have which they are not sharing with us and, you know, we have got care homes now, outrageously big care homes that the private sector have been providing, 120 people in this sort of size of things and that is a group that we need to look at. Homeless people, people sleeping on the street, are a major vulnerable group. In Bahrain, where I’ve been working, it didn’t take me much persuading, they are going to release early prisoners from the overcrowded prison facilities. We’ve got overcrowding in our prisons in some really crummy Victorian prisons. Those places will be very vulnerable to outbreaks. It is notjust the prisoners, the guards come and go. The guards are part of their community. They can bring the virus into a prison environment and it can take off. So, what are you saying? What are you saying should happen? It is under the radar and it is not being discussed. They have had outbreaks in prison in China and in Iran. They have had outbreaks in psychiatric units. These things are not being discussed, or if they are being discussed, they are being discussed behind closed doors and the public needs to be involved in these conversations. Richard. I think, from our perspective, we do all we can to the customers we serve, the 5 million customers a week and, as I said earlier, there is no shortage of food and, therefore, I think customers have a responsibility because our supply chain is very resilient, there are no stock issues and, therefore... Hang on, but there are things that you can’t get in a supermarket at the moment, like hand sanitiser. That is a stock issue, isn’t it? From our perspective, we do have some limits on hand sanitiser, just to keep the volume to make it available for everyone and that’s my point. If you panic buy, then those who are more vulnerable, who can’t afford to panic buy and stock build, which is a luxury only for those who can afford it and I think it’s really important to remember that. I do welcome the Government’s extra funding, the 5 billion that came, and it was heartening to hear the Chancellor say that however much it costs, you know, they will fund our Health Service to get through this but, as Louise said, there is more that is required on social care and, obviously, a longer term plan to properly fund and invest in our NHS, so that when this thing comes around again, we are more resilient. Finally, I think it’s about community, asJohn said, and it’s about looking out for each other and we all have a role to play in that. It is notjust Government, it is notjust retailers keeping the shops open and selling food, it’s about all of us, looking out for your neighbours, looking out for those who are vulnerable in your society, maybe doing some shopping for them and working together on this. I’ll come to you in a minute. Steve, in terms of supporting vulnerable groups, as Mark mentioned, there was no mention of social care and what is going to be done about that this afternoon. We will come to the Budget, I know you’ve got here, chief secretary, we will come to that, but in terms of supporting vulnerable groups when it comes to coronavirus, have you written the NH5 3 blank cheque? We have said we will fund whatever is needed. So is that what that means? Just so that we are all clear. What it is about is saying, firstly, in the Budget, announced a 12 billion package, a coordinated package. And toJohn’s central point, John is trying to tell you that there isn’t coordination. Well, let me give you a concrete example of coordination. On Wednesday, we didn’tjust announce the Budget, we had a coordinated action with our central bank, which is independent of Government, but announced a series of packages, the interest rate cut, the package of support to support businesses in terms of the credit cycle... So how is that helping the vulnerable people that Mark talking about? First, there is coordination, so in terms of vulnerable people, I spoke, before coming on this evening, to the deputy Chief Medical Officer. She was telling me about the leaders’ group that is working with care homes, working with local authorities, with Public Health England and I don’t accept the criticism of the staff of Public Health England, who I think are working tirelessly in response to this issue. This is about communication... If you let me finish. There is also work going on through the local resilience forums is to coordinate their action. So the reality is there is a huge amount of work going on, there is coordination both in terms of support for social care and adult social care. We can get onto the Budget and the package of measures for support in social care, supporting local authorities but there is both economic coordination but there is also coordination through Public Health England and NHS England and coordination, as Peter has touched on, across the UK through the different health systems we have, for example in England and Scotland, so it’s simply not the case to say... Why are they each doing their own modelling? Why is the Department of Health doing its own modelling? Public Health England doing its own modelling? The NHS hospitals doing their own modelling? Why haven’t we got one coordinated set of modelling? Is that right? Again, no, it is factually incorrect. We have got the scientific group, Sage, the scientific group that advises Government, that comes together with the top scientists within the United Kingdom to advise Government. However muchJohn wants to say there isn’t coordination, the fact that Pete and I, who disagree on many issues politically, are saying we are working together to coordinate I think tells the message that people are working together, because this is a common issue that... Let’s hear from Pete. We may have a little difference with an issue here. Yesterday, I was very impressed by the numbers that were getting rattled off the Budget and all the public will want to talk about that. £5 billion has been set aside for coronavirus and tackling this and I think that’s fair enough and I congratulate the Government for giving that money. What we don’t know is what’s going to happen with that money, and this is where I may agree withJohn. There doesn’t seem to be any particular plan about how this is going to be applied across our community within the NHS. What we are hearing from people here tonight and we are hearing it very sincerely, the main concern is vulnerable groups, people who may be more vulnerable to this illness than others. People who got caring responsibilities who are obviously very concerned about their loved ones and I think we need to know from Government how this is going to be applied and how this is going to be done and I think people need to be reassured that this money that has been set aside, a generous amount of money that has been set aside, will get through to ensure these groups are supported adequately and properly. OK, I’m going to come to the audience, so, briefly. The key challenge isn’t an financial one, it’s a staffing one, that is the key challenge we face, particularly in terms of staff themselves lost to the virus. So we are discussing with NHS England in terms of what finance is needed, we’ve set out a £5 billion package in the Budget as part of a wider £12 billion package and, as required, we will increase that if that is what is required. But the issue isn’t one of finance, the issue is much more one of staffing. No mention of funding for local public health. The issue in terms of pressure on staffing and, again, it comes back to the point we touched on earlier, in terms of the timing of interventions because I’m also concerned about the pressure on NHS staff themselves and in terms of, for example, NHS111 call staff are under pressure and my plea tonight is for people to use NHS online in terms of their inquiries because, as someone touched on earlier, people are hearing lots of different things, they are, unfortunately, hearing things at odds with our leading scientific advice, so NHS online is the place to go, that is where people should get their advice and we must time our interventions because... Do you believe this stuff? No. Actually... The public don’t believe this. John at the moment is a reasonably [one voice on the panel and I’m not forming a judgment on whetherJohn is right or not, I wouldn’t know, I know specialist. know, I am no specialist. Jeremy Hunt, obviously Secretary of State for health for many, many years, was saying tonight that he is concerned and surprised that more is not being done sooner. Just seeing the reaction you are getting from people here, this is such a different feeling to Question Time last week where, by and large, the audience had questions butjust sat quietly, listened, took it on board, whereas, tonight, I’m getting a very different feeling from the audience. You mentionjeremy and I phoned him this morning, spoke to him. He was our longest serving Health Secretary, he’s obviously a very informed voice, so we are engaging with parliamentarians, we are engaging across the United Kingdom. I’ll come back to the point, it is a concerted approach we are taking forward. I’m going to take a few more points from the audience before I move on. The man in the blue sweater. You talk about the NHS staff and how you’re worried about them, You talk about the NHS staff and how you’re worried about them, and the blank cheque, the £5 billion. Where was this before the coronavirus? We’ve been under pressure for years. APPLAUSE. Are you an NHS worker? What do you do in the NHS? I am an audiologist, and I mainly work with vulnerable adults, actually, who have medical conditions, and they are coming in to see me for hearing tests and what not. Are you feeling prepared and that you know enough? To be honest, not really. We’re not even asking the right questions of where they’ve come from, if they’ve travelled, or anything like that. Not getting any support, to be honest with you. Like I said, I think the NHS has been under pressure for years now, and now this has come all of a sudden, where is this £5 billion coming from? We might get onto that. Yes, the woman here in the black cardigan. You’ve just said to go to NHS online because that’s the best place to go. As we already know, 111 has been giving out the wrong information to some people... What do you mean, specifically? I read today that 111 advisers have been telling people that are potential corona sufferers the wrong advice, telling them they don’t need to quarantine when they do. Prior to Corona coming along, I got sick. I went on NHS online, it told me the wrong thing. It was a good thing I had a feeling and called 111, and an ambulance had to be sent for me, and I spent three days in the hospital. How can we trust if, during regular times, NHS online, that you have just directed us to, is incorrect? How can we trust it during this pandemic now? 0K, we are going to move on with the subject in a moment but do you just quickly want to quickly answer, you have got an NHS worker there who feels you’re not getting the right advice, not being told which questions to ask, and the women’s 3 point there. I think in terms of the investment, we are putting in an additional £6 billion. It was our number one priority at the manifesto, that’s why we are committed to 50,000 more nurses, it’s why we are committed to 50 million more GP appointments. It is the centre point of the manifesto on which we stood and that is why we are putting record investment into the NHS because it is our key commitment. In terms of in response to COVID—19, within the package we announced in the budget, and you say let’s get onto the detail of the budget, there was a £5 billion package specifically to support our public services, alongside the support for individuals and also for businesses. 0K. We could clearly talk about coronavirus for the entire programme, and it is tempting, I’ve got to be honest. But there was another thing a lot of you wanted to hear about, which is the budget. So, let’s hearfrom your specialist subject, you’ll be glad to know, let’s hearfrom Ben Moore. Has the Chancellor found the magic money tree we were told didn’t exist? APPLAUSE. Louise, let’s start with you. Well, let me firstly say how welcome any investment is after ten years of austerity, and it is investment that communities like this, here in Sandwell, and my own at home communities like this, here in Sandwell, and my own at home in Sheffield have been crying out for for the last ten years. It is pretty gelling to be told by the Tories for the last ten years that we are magicking up money trees, that we are pursuing a debunked economic strategy. And to come forward with this budget yesterday, that commits to considerable borrowing to invest in infrastructure... Well, at least you have to admit they are right, then! Presumably? They have to admit we were right! That is the right way round, isn’t it, Fiona? We have been seeing a lot of critique and analysis of this budget, saying it is effectively a Labour budget. What the Institute for Fiscal Studies have come out today and said is, despite commitment in certain public spending priorities, notably the NHS and the police, austerity will still be baked in in certain areas, particularly local government. Sandwell local council is still set to receive cuts of £15 million a year for the next several years, and that is the real, sharp end of austerity that communities have been feeling for the last few years. We talked a little bit about social care so far but this is one of the biggest political challenges of our generation. The Prime Minister recognised that after he was first elected Tory leader. He stood outside Downing Street and promised to work cross party to tackle it, yet there was nothing in the budget yesterday about funding or a plan. Hundreds of thousands of older and vulnerable people are isolated in their homes with unmet care needs. We have an underpaid, undervalued workforce that is on its knees, and in the middle of a public health crisis, we have still got no plans from the Government to tackle it. This should really have been a major priority of the Tories’ budget this week and it was glaring in its absence. APPLAUSE Pete. Can I say to the gentleman not only have they found the magic money tree but they’ve stumbled into a veritable rainforest of them. This is about the most remarkable, curious budget I think I’ve ever seen in my 20 years in Parliament. It’s like the Conservatives have dropped this tag of fiscal conservatism and somehow become unreconstructed Keynesian. They’ve discovered the value of fiscal stimulus. We always knew we were in for a mad ride when we got Dominic Cummings and his weirdos and misfits running the Treasury. My advice to the good people of West Bromwich is buckle yourself in, because you’re going to have the ups and downs when it comes to this budget, and how this treasury is going to be run. It’s going to be a crazy, crazy ride. Of course, there is not so much the elephant in the room but a herd of woolly mammoths in the guise of Brexit, which barely got a mention yesterday. The cultural, economic and social damage that Brexit is going to do to our country within the next year is barely addressed, and I think this is going to be a real issue. We have the good ship conservatism with her new—found insatiable appetite for spending billions of pounds in fiscal stimulus, sailing the seas of uncertainty, being buffeted by coronavirus in the international markets. Captained by Dominic Cummings with his crew of weirdos and misfits. God help you all. How many metaphors do you want to get in there? Hang on, we’ve got the woolly mammoths, then we have the ship and there is the other... Oh, the rainforest! You mentioned Brexit. Richard, you support and have always supported the idea of Leave. Do you still support the idea Brexit negotiations should continue, given everything that is going on? Well, yes. I see the opportunities Brexit can afford. And I was delighted, at least from a business perspective, that we had some level of certainty, in terms of the future direction. But I think at the moment there is no point chest—thumping and having strong rhetoric with Brussels because no one’s listening. And this isn’t the time for argument. This is a time for trying to work with Brussels to try to get through this virus. So, at the moment, I would pause it. I’m not necessarily saying delay to the end of the year but we have a pandemic on our hands, we have a crisis, and we need to get through it. In terms of the budget, the magic money tree? Yeah, I am a northern—based businessman. We were founded in the north. Out of our 1,000 shops, most of them are outside of the M25, so I am delighted with the levelling up agenda. But it has to come from the marginalised towns and villages around the UK. So, for me, things like HS2 are a waste of money, I think it’ll take far too much time, it’ll cost too much, and I think, environmentally, hugely destructive. I think we need to look at business rates as well, there was something in there for smaller businesses but that’ll do nothing for the majority of the store closures up and down the country. It won’t help the BHS, the Maplins, the Toys "R" Us, all of those big employers that are really struggling under this old, Victorian taxation system. So, I think there is a lot more they can do, and making the local high streets places where people want to work and live. We have a lot of empty space on our property portfolio. And, yet, property tax is levied with VAT on conversion but not new—build housing. I don’t think young people want to live in out—of—town commuter belts with car bourne existence. They want to live in these towns and villages. And it’s so important because I see it everyday in our stores around the country. We are one of the most geographically unequal countries in the developed world, and we must invest, notjust in the northern cities but in those marginalised cities and towns. Better bus routes, 3 drop in business rates, and better housing for young people fit for today. APPLAUSE. Let’s hear from the audience, man in the red tie. I am an NHS governorfor mental health services for over 12 years. One of the key things I’ve seen, and also I am a board member, I’ve seen cutbacks every single year for the past six years from the Tory Government. We haven’t got investment in mental health. What is the Government’s agenda on improving access to mental health services? With realistic investment rather than just lip service they’ve been giving us for years? Yes, the man there. Yesterday, the Chancellor reeled off quite a few names of inventors who invented and put Great Britain on the map. How would the inventors would need engineers and other trades to put their things back into the system. I never heard anything about engineers. I am an engineer. We are actually struggling very hard to find any engineers, especially with Brexit coming, there is no engineers in the UK at all. What is the Government doing? Are they going to issue bursaries for engineers, to get them aboard, get younger people coming in? At the moment, there is nobody coming into our trades. 0K, yes, the woman back there with the glasses. I think the magic money tree has come from the ten years of cuts the Tory Government has put in place. You’ve cut education, mental health, all local government. So, you’ve destroyed communities. You’ve destroyed communities in the West Midlands and it’s going to take a lot more than the current budget to build them back up. APPLAUSE 50, Steve... You’ve heard what the audience have had to say. We’ve talked about a few other issues there, they got lobbed in, important nonetheless, about mental health and engineers. John, I will come to you, I promise. I can see your hand up, I’m definitely going to come to you. What you’re hearing a lot of people saying is, hang on, it was all about austerity. Theresa May kept saying there is no magic money tree. Suddenly there is a rainforest, as you, Peter put it. And it is huge borrowing! The key is delivering on our manifesto promises, which is our commitment to the NHS and public services and also to addressing the gaps in productivity and levelling up around the United Kingdom. The reason we are now able to do that is because we inherited a situation where the deficit was out of control at 10%, where Labour ministers themselves were writing that all the money had been spent. And we’ve got that deficit down from 10% to under 2%. Which is why the Chancellor could announce this package whilst meeting the three fiscal rules that we also set out at the budget. You’re now going to send that deficit right up again. No, this is about meeting the fiscal rules, levelling up the country. If I take the five biggest city regions outside London, if they were at the same productivity level as the UK average, that would be worth an additional £35 billion a year so we have a gap between the south, and London in particular, and the opportunities in other areas of the country. And we recognise that talent is equally distributed across the UK. But opportunity is not. So, we need to address the issues that hold productivity back, things like transport, infrastructure, skills. That’s what we promised to do in the manifesto and we are delivering on what we promise to the British public. So you are not worried about the deficit any more? You have the Office for Budget Responsibility saying they expect the deficit to rise to a six—year high of 67 billion. No, so let me tell you why. Firstly, we have got historic low interest rates, which is an opportunity. Secondly, the key thing to look out for those who want to look at the red book is the fact that debt as a percentage of GDP comes down in this Parliament and comes down in the final year, and the key is that we can do this because of the difficult decisions that were taken over the last decade. So, as a result of that, we can now unlock this investment, level up across the United Kingdom, address the differences in productivity... Steve, that’s nonsense. Your austerity measures held growth back, held wage growth back, grew debt. Absolute nonsense. John, you wanted to come in. Well, there’s three things I’d like to say, really. I mean, I was brought up in the ‘505 and ‘605 to believe that we should rejoice when a sinner repents and... ..and to rediscover One Nation conservatism, I think we ought to celebrate that and see if it’s actually going to happen. You know, that’s the discussion we’ve just been having, but we have to recognise, we’ve had ten years of austerity. Michael Marmot has recently published his follow—up to the work on inequalities in health and there is a ten—year gap in life expectancy that has opened up because of these austerity years. And that will take a long time to sort out. What I would like to say about the Budget is there was no mention of public health at the local level, or the national level, actually. Since 2013, public health has been largely centralised into Public Health England. They’ve got a vanity project on the go to spend almost £1 billion in Harlow New Town, where they are going to centralise a lot of the expertise which we’ve had since the Second World War in regions, regional specialist public health. It’s a shadow of its former self since 2013. The local level of public health in the local town hall, they’ve had 30% Budget cuts. The staffing levels have been slashed, they don’t have their own nurses who can do the contact tracing and so on. There was no mention of public health in the town hall in the Budget yesterday. The NHS side of public health and the local authority side of public health are equally important. We’ve got a weak system and we are going to depend on it over the next weeks and months. It is a disgrace. The only thing I would say on the Brexit point that was raised, I’m working with Bahrain at the invitation of the Crown Prince, who is providing personal leadership. They’ve got a grip on it, which I envy in terms of what is going on here. They are committed to openness with the public, they publish all the data, they’ve got daily press conferences and everything, they’ve built a camp for quarantine in ten days for 3,000 people, it’s as good as anything you will find at Butlins, and they are testing and they are doing the thing properly. When I was there the first time, last month, we realised they didn’t have enough testing equipment, the Crown Prince signed a cheque, we ordered the testing equipment to raise the capacity. Our lot were doing nothing. Whether we’ve now got the testing capacity for what’s needed, who knows? But it’s going to come from Germany and Switzerland. They are not going to prioritise us any more because we are no longer in the European Union and these are consequences of coming out of the EU, and I hope these things will be realised by people who naively thought we can go on paddle our own canoe, and paddle our own canoe, this little island of ours. Steve, we’re almost of time. We’ve only got about 20 seconds. John started off saying there is no money but then went on to complain about £1 billion being spent on a new facility. What I would highlight is we are investing in particularly in our research and development. So, £22 billion in R&D, 4 billion more than the manifesto. That speaks to the optimism we have for the country, we want to level it up but we want to invest in the technology of the future, that 22 billion in R&D is a big part of it. Right, we could keep talking, couldn’t we, but our hour’s up. I’m afraid, we are out of time. Next week, we will be in Weston—super—Mare and the week after that, we will be in Shrewsbury, so if you want to be in the audience, call 033 0123 9988. Or go to the Question Time website and you can follow the instructions there. And if you want to keep talking about this, have your say on tonight’s topics, you can join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time, which is on Radio 5Live right now. But, for now, itjust remains for me to say thank you very much to the panel, thank you to all of you, I’m sorry I didn’t get around more of you, there were so many hands up and, thank you, of course, to you at home for watching and listening. From West Bromwich, bye—bye.