Welcome to Question Time. On the panel, Robert Bucklin, Secretary of State for panel, Robert Bucklin, Secretary of State forJustice, previously Solicitor General. Labour’s newly Solicitor General. labour’s newly appointed Solicitor General. Labour’s newly appointed Foreign Secretary. And joining us from home, Lisa Nandy. joining us from home, Lisa Mandy. Karan joining us from home, Lisa Nandy. Karan Bilimoria ra, crossbench life peer and vice president of the CBI. And a Doctor Who specialises in And a Doctor who specialises in palliative And a Doctor Who specialises in palliative care working full—time on palliative rare working full-time on the front palliative care working full—time on the front line and author of Dear Life, Dying the front line and author of Deer Life, Dying With Dignity. Dr Rachel Life, Dying with Dignity. Dr Rachel Clarke. Life, Dying With Dignity. Dr Rachel Clarke. That evening and welcome to my guests. And Lisa who is Clarke. That evening and welcome to my guests. And Lisa who isjoining my guests. And Lisa who is joining us from wigan. my guests. And Lisa who isjoining us from Wigan. As you know, we have us from wigan. As you know, we have no studio us from Wigan. As you know, we have no studio audience, which is a pretty strange feeling. But this week’s pre—recorded questions comes week’s pre-recorded questions comes from week’s pre—recorded questions comes from Wolverhampton, an area which has seen high levels of coronavirus and also high levels of death. We have pre—recorded questions from have pre-recorded questions from there, sadly have pre—recorded questions from there, sadly we cannot be there in person. If there, sadly we rannot be there in person. If you there, sadly we cannot be there in person. If you have anything you want to feed into the panel here from home, contact us on social media. I will get those comments and I will feed them in as we go along. Let’s take our I will feed them in as we go along. Let’s take ourfirst I will feed them in as we go along. Let’s take our first question. Before we do, particularly because Before we do, particularty because you are here, Before we do, particularly because you are here, Rachel on your day off. Thank you so much and you are on the front we want to do our clap for carers. Let’s show our appreciation. APPLAUSE Let’s take our first pre-recorded question Let’s take our first pre—recorded question tonight from Frank Wilson. Good evening. My question is this. The mark of a civilised society is how it provides for its most vulnerable members. How many marks out of ten with the panel give to this country for its record on social care. 50 how many marks out social rare. So how many marks out of ten? Rachel, social care. 50 how many marks out of ten? Rachel, since this is your area? Absolutely. In answer to this question I ran area? Absolutely. In answer to this question I can say that I am seeing question I ran say that I am seeing right now, question I can say that I am seeing right now, precisely on the front line, exactly the esteem in which we hold our most vulnerable members of society. Of course, people in care society. Of course, peopla in rare homes are homes are predominantly elderly homes are predominantly elderty citizens, homes are predominantly elderly citizens, sometimes young citizens who are disabled as well. We know these individuals, historically, not just for the last ten years, but for the last couple of decades across both political parties have been some of the most marginalised, neglacted, some of the most marginalised, neglected, abandoned and diminished members of our society. Successive governments, both Labour and Conservative I have to say, although in the last ten years under the guise of austerity, these have been Conservative governments, have prevaricated, talked the talk about prevarirated, talked the talk about addressing prevaricated, talked the talk about addressing the grotesque underfunding of our social care underfunding of our social rare sector underfunding of our social care sector while failing to deliver. There have been 17 White papers, There have been 17 white papers, green papers There have been 17 White papers, green papers and national state reviews into the funding of our social care sector in the last 20 social rare sector in the last 20 years and social care sector in the last 20 years and precisely no action. 50 years and precisely no action. So now, we years and precisely no action. 50 now, we have a sector we years and precisely no action. So now, we have a sector we know is raring for now, we have a sector we know is caring for society’s most vulnerable members and yet it has been run down members and yet it has been mn down and under members and yet it has been run down and underfunded into an members and yet it has been run down and under funded into an absolute travesty of what it should be. You have that as the background into which inserts itself a virus that we know from China and Italy particularly, affects these vulnerable, elderly members of vulnerable, elderty members of society more vulnerable, elderly members of society more than anyone else. The death rate soars once you get into people in the 705 and 805. How do peopla in the 705 and 805. How do you think the people in the 705 and 805. How do you think the government has responded to that when it comes to rare responded to that when it comes to care homes? Absolutely inadequate rare homes? Absolutely inadequate woefully, I care homes? Absolutely inadequate woefully, I am afraid. They need to change the change the testing policy when only people in hospital were being tested was the point at which people in was the point at which peopla in rare was the point at which people in care homes and people receiving care rare homes and people receiving rare in their care homes and people receiving care in their own homes were thrown under a bus, they were abandoned. And so were the absolutely extraordinary men and women who are carers themselves. We are meant to have parity in this country, we are meant to have a department that is the Department of Health and social rare, yet the Department of Health and social care, yet the social side of that rare, yet the social side of that department care, yet the social side of that department is the Cinderella service. We have 122,000 vacancies in the rare service. We have 122,000 vacancies in the care sector. Many carers are in the rare sector. Many carers are paid the in the care sector. Many carers are paid the minimum wage, they are treated without respect. Yesterday the Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, tried to address that by offering them a badge. We have had are commenting about the badge. Let me just find it. Please explain why a badge is supposed to make a real difference to me and my colleagues in the fight against Covid—19 when in the fight against Covid-19 when we in the fight against Covid—19 when we need PPE and testing. Robert, you have heard the directors saying it is shambolic, haphazard and paltry. There has been a huge amount of criticism in the way the government has handled the social sector when it comes to coronavirus, what Marx it comes to coronavims, what Marx would you give it comes to coronavirus, what Marx would you give the government on that? Marks out of ten are difficult to assess at the moment. I am not going to pretend everything in the garden is lovely because a lot of us have relatives and friends we know in rare have relatives and friends we know in care homes who are getting in rare homes who are getting outstanding in care homes who are getting outstanding treatment from carers who work so hard and incredibly hard. I think the badge is who work so hard and incredibly hard. I think the badge isjust part hard. I think the badge is just part of a hard. I think the badge isjust part of a sincere and genuine move, not just by the government but by the rare system just by the government but by the care system itself to seek and rare system itself to seek and improve the care system itself to seek and improve the recognition for care improve the recognition for rare workers. improve the recognition for care workers. But if you don’t want to give an answer with marks out of ten, how would you rate, categorise, describe the government’s performance in the coronavirus crisis when it comes to social care so far? I would say a lot more to do. which so far? I would say a lot more to do. Which is so far? I would say a lot more to do. which is why so far? I would say a lot more to do. Which is why this announcement do. which is why this announcement by Matt do. Which is why this announcement by Matt Hancock yesterday was welcome. The testing that is required, the treatment we are embarking on for extra care workers embarking on for extra rare workers and the genuine embarking on for extra care workers and the genuine push by government to deal with, what is a very vulnerable sector. I think it is right to talk about the particular challanges right to talk about the particular challenges in care homes. We want to challanges in rare homes. We want to see that challenges in care homes. We want to see that infection rate reduced within our care homes. Because if we within our rare homes. Because if we don’t within our care homes. Because if we don’t reduce it there, indeed of the vulnerable part of our society, we are not going to get the overall rate down. That is so important in dealing with this crisis. Lisa, the question is how many marks out of ten should the government receive for its treatment of social care in for its treatment of social rare in this for its treatment of social care in this current crisis? I don’t want to get into scoring the government out of ten. In the Labour leadership of ten. In the labour leadership contest of ten. In the Labour leadership contest we were all asked to score each other out of ten and it doesn’t get as anywhere as a country. The thing I want to see the government do now is recognise, as I think Matt Hancock has, they have been too slow to understand the crisis in emerging in our rare to understand the crisis in emerging in our care homes and just take in our rare homes and just take action to in our care homes and just take action to deal with it. There was a commitment early on the NHS would commitment earty on the NHS would get all the commitment early on the NHS would get all the resources it needs to deal with this crisis. The same commitment should surely be made to social rare commitment should surely be made to social care as well. It is important social rare as well. It is important the social care as well. It is important the government starts producing daily statistics about deaths in daily statistis about deaths in rare daily statistics about deaths in care homes, because we need to track rare homes, because we need to track this, care homes, because we need to track this, understand where the problem is and what more we need to be doing to tackle it. We need to roll out testing to the social care sector. I welcome the fact the government has said they will now do this and has started to do this but we have 1.2 million peopla started to do this but we have 1.2 million people who work in our million peopla who work in our social million people who work in our social care sector and as of social rare sector and as of yesterday, social care sector and as of yesterday, only around 500 tests had been carried out. The biggest issue I get from home carers, care home I get from home carers, rare home workers I get from home carers, care home workers here in Wigan is still this workers here in wigan is still this question workers here in Wigan is still this question about PPE, personal protective equipment. Last night, one of those care home workers one of those rare home workers messaged me one of those care home workers messaged me to say she had been on Amazon buying protective gear, because although they finally got sent some masks, they are already mnning out. She sent some masks, they are already running out. She said it is really, mnning out. She said it is really, really hard to running out. She said it is really, really hard to overstate how scared really hard to overstate how stared people are. really hard to overstate how scared people are. We are trying our best peopla are. We are trying our best not to people are. We are trying our best not to get this virus but we know it is a question of when, not if. They are working in small rooms where they cannot socially distance and it takes two people to move a person so they cannot keep away from each other. I have one constituent who has a wife and young baby at home. He is not just has a wife and young baby at home. He is notjust terrified about He is not just terrified about getting it He is notjust terrified about getting it himself giving it to the vulnerable people he is looking after, he is terrified about what is going to happen to his family as well. The worst thing about the message I got last night was a common theme, she said to me don’t reveal who I am because I would lose my job. We have reveal who I am because I would lose myjob. We have shamefully my job. We have shamefully underpaid, myjob. We have shamefully underpaid, undertreated, undervalue people who work in this vital peopla who work in this vital sector. people who work in this vital sector. We have done this for a very long time and we need the get them the support they need to do their important the support they need to do their importantjoh the support they need to do their important job safely. the support they need to do their importantjob safely. When this is importantjob safely. when this is over we importantjob safely. When this is over we need a proper reckoning as a country about how we came to get this so badly wrong. Karen? We are in awe of the NHS and what they have done. But who has mentioned the care done. But who has mentioned the rare sector in done. But who has mentioned the care sector in the last month and suddenly it has come to light? 1.5 million people work in the sector, million peopla work in the sector, doing an million people work in the sector, doing an amazing job in difficult circumstances and getting paid very little and looking after a million peoplo. little and looking after a million people. Half of them are in care peopla. Half of them are in rare homes people. Half of them are in care homes and the other half are at home. This is extraordinary work and what I find difficult to understand is we have been measuring the sad deaths and every death is awful under my thoughts go out to all of the families and loved ones. We have not been counting the care homes. I not been counting the rare homes. I don’t not been counting the care homes. I don’t understand. We know from other countries, 50% of the deaths often countries, 5096 of the deaths often take place in countries, 50% of the deaths often take place in care homes and we have take place in rare homes and we have not been testing take place in care homes and we have not been testing the staff, not been testing the patience. They have been going to hospital, and I am hearing stories of them going to hospital, not being tested and then going back to the care homes. 50 at long last to the rare homes. So at long last it is getting the to the care homes. 50 at long last it is getting the attention and the focus it deserves. We will be learning lots of lessons about this learning lots of lassons about this and will learning lots of lessons about this and will be better as a country looking forward and I think the care looking forward and I think the rare sector looking forward and I think the care sector will be more highlighted, appreciated, funded and resorts. Gareth Thomas says, to isolate and catch the spread of the virus you should test everyone in care homes, should test everyone in rare homes, when you note should test everyone in care homes, when you note the residents that have it versus those that don’t, same for the carers. Only then can same for the carers. Only then ran you isolate and same for the carers. Only then can you isolate and deal with the coronavirus. If we knew from the start, says Rona, this will kill older and vulnerable people more, older and vulnerable peopla more, why weren’t older and vulnerable people more, why weren’t nursing in care homes why weren’t nursing in rare homes the priority? why weren’t nursing in care homes the priority? What else can we conclude except they didn’t care. It conclude except they didn’t rare. It does conclude except they didn’t care. It does seem odd, Robert, the advice given by Public Health England in Febmary at given by Public Health England in February at the start of all this, whilst it whilst it remains unlikely that peopla whilst it remains unlikely that people receiving care in a care home people receiving rare in a rare home would people receiving care in a care home would become infected. There was no PPE and they were told not to wear masks because they serve no purpose. Looking back with hindsight, that seems extraordinary? It was advice that was tendered, listen to and the priority was given to the front line in the NHS. Do you think it was the right advice? Care homes are complex right advice? (“are homes are complex places. If they right advice? Care homes are complex places. If they can be managed in a places. If they ran be managed in a way, if there is a places. If they can be managed in a way, if there is a particular problem on a particular wing and they ran problem on a particular wing and they can isolate that group of they ran isolate that group of peopla they can isolate that group of people carefully, it can be managed peopla carefully, it ran be managed in a people carefully, it can be managed in a sensible way. But there is no doubt, because of the age and the vulnerability, the fact elderly vulnerability, the fact elderty peopla vulnerability, the fact elderly people are suffering with complex conditions. That was not my point. when you have conditions. That was not my point. When you have a lot of people with when you have a lot of peopla with undertying When you have a lot of people with underlying conditions and are undertying conditions and are elderty underlying conditions and are elderly they will be vulnerable to elderty they will be vulnerable to this elderly they will be vulnerable to this disease. Robert, I think that is slightly disingenuous. We had a lot of information from other countries who were ahead of us in terms of the impact on people in terms of the impact on peopla in rare terms of the impact on people in care homes from this virus. 50 we rare homes from this vims. So we knew exactly care homes from this virus. 50 we knew exactly what we were going to be up against. For example, in Italy and Spain ahead of us on the curve, we had the most appalling reports of paramedics going into resident’s paramedic going into resident’s homes paramedics going into resident’s homes and care homes and finding homes and rare homes and finding those elderty homes and care homes and finding those elderly men and women literally lying dead in their beds. They had just died of coronavirus with nobody there, they had died alone, the worst possible kind of death. We knew that weeks and weeks ago. The other thing that is important to stress is, what we are hearing about PPE, it is easy to talk about that in abstract terms, but for the people who are actually but for the peopla who are actually raring for but for the people who are actually caring for these patients, whether raring for these patients, whether they are NHS caring for these patients, whether they are NHS or social carers, it is really hard to overemphasise how frightening it is to go to work, put on PPE, that you know in many cases is lower in standards than the WHO standards. You do the best you can, standards. You do the best you ran, you rannot do standards. You do the best you can, you cannot do anything but help your vulnerable patients or people you are raring for, vulnerable patients or people you are caring for, but you know it is are raring for, but you know it is inadequate. are caring for, but you know it is inadequate. That is even in hospital sometimes where we are getting the best supply of PPE. In care homes, I best supply of PPE. In rare homes, I know best supply of PPE. In care homes, I know because people are telling me, know because peopla are telling me, I work know because people are telling me, I work with carers, they having to do things like literally where a sanitary towel over their face because that is the best they can because that is the best they ran come up with because that is the best they can come up with to protect themselves from infection. They are not getting the masks, they are having to reuse the masks, they are not getting the gowns and they are not getting everything they need. They should have protection on their eyes and they are not getting it. They still help these vulnerable patients and they do that putting their own lives at risk and the lives of their children, their at risk and the lives of their children, theirfamilies at risk and the lives of their children, their families at risk. at risk and the lives of their children, theirfamilies at risk. It children, their families at risk. It is just not children, theirfamilies at risk. It isjust not acceptable children, theirfamilies at risk. It is just not acceptable to say, we are doing more, we are going to fix this. Where is the PPE now? We are a this. where is the PPE now? We are a rich country with a this. Where is the PPE now? We are a rich country with a fifth richest economy in the world, surely it is within the remit of this country and this government to produce sufficient paper masks and plastic gowns to protect carers and if not, why not? m: We have a comment, saying I run a We have a comment, saying I nm a rare home We have a comment, saying I run a care home and my staff place their rare home and my staff place their lives on care home and my staff place their lives on the line every day. They have been ignored by successive governments. We can’t even order PPE for their safety. Despite that, they remain diligent and professional. Another question, from Duncan. So, given the potential plight of many SMFs, given the potential plight of many SMEs, likely to go out of business SMFs, likely to go out of business duﬂng SMFs, likely to go out of business during this SMEs, likely to go out of business during this endless lockdown, what is the panel’s view of how the Government is going to manage and balance the transition out of lockdown anytime soon, without compromising the health of nation? Karan, I compromising the health of nation? Karen, I wanted to ask you, first. Karan, I wanted to ask you, first. As head Karen, I wanted to ask you, first. As head and founder of Cobra Beer are, how is this affecting your business? I can only assume badly? business? I ran only assume badly? And what business? I can only assume badly? And what is your view in terms of how we begin to come out of this? Duncan is talking about SMEs in Duncan is talking about SMFs in particular. Duncan is talking about SMEs in particular. Small Duncan is talking about SMEs in particular. Smalland Duncan is talking about SMEs in particular. Small and medium—sized particular. Small and medium-sized enterprises, I particular. Small and medium—sized enterprises, I should say. No enterprises, Ishould say. No question enterprises, I should say. No question about it, this is the worst possibla crisis. question about it, this is the worst possible crisis. It is a living possibla crisis. It is a living nightmare possible crisis. It is a living nightmare for the business sector. Not just in the nightmare for the business sector. Notjust in the UK, but around the Not just in the UK, but around the world. It is Notjust in the UK, but around the world. It is a demand shock, supply shocks, domino effect, everybody in the supply chain. In our case, we the supply chain. In our use, we sunplv the supply chain. In our case, we supply thousands of restaurants. Basically, they are all shocked. They are not allowed to operate. Some do take away, but that’s only a small amount. They have no revenue. It directly affects us and the vast majority of our sales are in the foundation of restaurants. We can foundation of restaurants. We ran sunplv foundation of restaurants. We can supply supermarkets, but with the production, we can’t produce because a lot of staff are not, for safety reasons, working. 50 the production reasons, working. So the production is reasons, working. 50 the production is reduced. Even supermarket sales are not as high as they could be. We are affected very badly. We hold webinars with the restaurants every week and they are crying. They have mn out of week and they are crying. They have run out of cash already. The loans, mn out of rash already. The loans, a huge amount of run out of cash already. The loans, a huge amount of money has been provided by the government, is that not working? Full credit to the government, they did a great not working? Full credit to the government, they did a greatjob government, they did a great job right at the government, they did a greatjob right at the beginning. Three of them £30 billion, £60 billion of them 50 billion, £60 billion of employee them £30 billion, £60 billion of employee support, rates being free for a year. -- employee support, rates being free for a year. —— £330 billion. Being for a year. -- £130 billion. Being able to delay for a year. —— £330 billion. Being able to delay your taxes and VAT, not having landlords able to throw you out for three months. That has been fantastic. Grants as well. At the one help that businesses need is (“ash now, the one help that businesses need is Cash now, and that is the business (“ash now, and that is the business interruption Cash now, and that is the business interruption loan scheme, particularly the one for under £145 particularty the one for under £145 million particularly the one for under £145 million turnover company is. It’s not working as well as it should. 300,000 businesses applied for these. At the moment, the Government guarantees 8096 these. At the moment, the Government guarantees 80% of the loans. Out of guarantees 8096 of the loans. Out of the guarantees 80% of the loans. Out of the 300,000, just 6000 have been given the loans, three and a half weeks later. Only £1 billion out of this. I think the main reason, and I were saying this from the beginning, we’ve got to be like Germany is doing, like Switzerland is doing, doing, like Switzeriand is doing, where doing, like Switzerland is doing, where the government guarantees 100% where the government guarantees 10096 of the where the government guarantees 100% of the loans where the government guarantees 10096 of the loans up where the government guarantees 100% of the loans up to £500,000. In Switzerland, they guarantee to give Switzertand, they guarantee to give you that Switzerland, they guarantee to give you that money and 48 hours. I know businesses that have got the loan, appﬁed businesses that have got the loan, applied for it and got it within 12 hours. We need to apply, within a limit, £500,000, because it is mainly the SMEs that need that help. mainly the SMB that need that help. If they get mainly the SMEs that need that help. If they get that 100% guarantee, If they get that 10096 guarantee, then If they get that 100% guarantee, then the banks will be able to lend then the banks will be able to land that then the banks will be able to lend that money. Because they won’t be worrying about being liable for the 20%? The Government is going the 2096? The Government is going the extra 20%? The Government is going the extra mile. Interest rates are 0.1%, extra mile. Interest rates are 0.196, the lowest extra mile. Interest rates are 0.1%, the lowest since when the Bank of England was founded. You have to give credit to what the Government is doing. Do this extra bit and the money will flow through and then the businesses will get the cash they businesses will get the rash they need businesses will get the cash they need now. And they need the cash. need now. And they need the rash. What need now. And they need the rash. what is need now. And they need the cash. What is the point of these other measures? The employee support scheme is fantastic, £250,000 a month, scheme is fantastic, £250,000 3 month, 80% of scheme is fantastic, £250,000 a month, 80% of salaries, it’s great. month, 8096 of salaries, it’s great. If the company month, 80% of salaries, it’s great. If the company isn’t surviving when we come out of the lockdown, they need this cash to survive. I think need this rash to survive. I think the 1001: need this cash to survive. I think the 100% will do it. Lisa? I think the 10096 will do it. Lisa? I think the the 100% will do it. Lisa? I think the Government was right to extend the lockdown today. I think we have to be guided by the evidence about infection rates and whether this is under control, and the criteria they set out around making sure the NHS could cope, in particular, that is very, very important. There are definitely things that could be done now to help deal with the economic fallout from all of this. I very, very much agree that the loan scheme to small businesses needs to be reformed. reformed. The number that have been able to access this is a vanishingly small. And that’s because the banks are reluctant to lend small. And that’s because the banks are reluctant to [end because the are reluctant to lend because the government are reluctant to [end because the government tracker hasn’t underwritten 100% of those loans, as underwritben10096 of those loans, as you rightly underwritten 100% of those loans, as you rightly heard has been done in Germany and Switzerland. That means Germany and Switzertand. That means that Germany and Switzerland. That means that businesses are not getting the help they need. I have businesses in wigan that are help they need. I have businesses in Wigan that are perfectly profitable, wigan that are perfectly profitabla, healthy, Wigan that are perfectly profitable, healthy, viable businesses, but they are taking a short—term hit now are taking a short-term hit now because they are taking a short—term hit now because they are say a travel business, where people clearly business, where peopla dearty aren’t business, where people clearly aren’t booking holidays at the moment. But once this is over, they will start to see recovery. They need the cash now, and they simply need the rash now, and they simply can’t get it. But I need the cash now, and they simply can’t get it. But I think alongside that as well, we need to think about what is our exit strategy for lockdown, and started to set out some clarity from the government about how they anticipate is looking. Because many of these small businesses are having to make decisions about how long they can decisions about how long they ran remain decisions about how long they can remain viable in this situation. remain viabla in this situation. They may remain viable in this situation. They may need additional support, if this is going to go on for a long time. In other countries, the lifting of restrictions has happened in very, very different ways. In some countries, small businesses have been allowed to reopen, small shops have been allowed to reopen. I was speaking to the Prime Minister in Sweden today, who... They have pursued a strategy of keeping some businesses open and still running. businesses open and still mnning. If businesses open and still running. If businesses knew what the Government was intending, they would be able to start planning for this now. At the moment, they be able to start planning for this now. At the moment, theyjust don’t now. At the moment, they just don’t have the clarity now. At the moment, theyjust don’t have the clarity that they need about what the Government is proposing. And that means when we do come out of this immediate public health crisis, we may find that a lot of peopla health crisis, we may find that a lot of people don’t have those jobs lot of peopla don’t have those jobs to go back to. lot of people don’t have those jobs to go back to. Two things there, Robert. Duncan asked how we can get Robert. Duncan asked how we ran get out of the Robert. Duncan asked how we can get out of the lockdown. Karan Robert. Duncan asked how we can get out of the lockdown. Karen and Lisa out of the lockdown. Karan and Lisa were talking out of the lockdown. Karen and Lisa were talking about the business interruption loans, going to 100% instead of 80%. But also giving business uncertainty, where you can, business uncertainty, where you ran, about business uncertainty, where you can, about when they might start to begin to think about... Because they need to plan, for when they might be coming out of it? We can’t get away from the inherent uncertainty that we face. First of all, Karan’s point we face. First of all, Karen’s point about the banks and their role in about the banks and their rola in this, about the banks and their role in this, we have already taken action to de-dog the this, we have already taken action to de—clog the process, to make it to de-dog the process, to make it easier for to de—clog the process, to make it easierfor the money to de—clog the process, to make it easier for the money to to de—clog the process, to make it easierfor the money to reach to de—clog the process, to make it easier for the money to reach the firms and people it is intended to firms and peopla it is intended to reach. firms and people it is intended to reach. The Treasury is constantly looking at the scheme and its operation to see how better... What operation to see how better... what about operation to see how better... What about businesses increasing the loan coverage to 100%? Is a fair point. I coverage to10096? Is a fair point. I know the coverage to 100%? Is a fair point. I know the Treasury is considering the operation of the scheme daily. They set it up at breakneck speed. I think tribute is being paid to the fact that the Government really stood up to the challenge and got on with it. I stood up to the challenge and got on with it. Ithink stood up to the challenge and got on with it. I think the answer is that we are looking daily at the operation of this, because our intention is, as the Chancellor said, that we will do what it takes. And we mean what we say buy that. when we get And we mean what we say buy that. When we get comments in, for when we get comments in, for example, I mn When we get comments in, for example, I run a business employing example, I nm a business employing 17 people and I example, I run a business employing 17 people and I haven’t had a penny. 17 peopla and I haven’t had a penny. I haven’t 17 people and I haven’t had a penny. I haven’t had 17 peopla and I haven’t had a penny. I haven’t had any 17 people and I haven’t had a penny. I haven’t had any grants, loans, I can’t get furlough money for myself. I’m taking no salary. If I am still in business in two weeks, it will be a miracle. Another, and the government back do more to ensure that small businesses can get access that small businesses ran get access to the support that small businesses can get access to the support they have announced? Banks are taking too long and declining application for coronavirus business interruption coronavims business interruption loans, coronavirus business interruption loans, despite having a viable business. We help the bank with billions, they must do more. You must have heard this time and time again? what ran must have heard this time and time again? What can you practically do? again? what ran you practically do? That’s right, again? What can you practically do? That’s right, the banks have to help us help everybody else. They have to step up to the mark. This is a very uncertain and risk—based time. We uncertain and risk-based time. We expect uncertain and risk—based time. We expect everybody to take their share of risk. The Government is laying billions of pounds on the line here to save many, many businesses that we think are worth saving, because they do have a future. This is why the Treasury is looking everyday at how to improve and refine the system to make sure it the people that need that money. To the government’s credit, you listened, right from when Rishi announced these are the measures, we said, you left out the self-employed. measures, we said, you left out the self—employed. You listened, and the self-employed. You listened, and the same self—employed. You listened, and the same employee support equivalent goes to the self—employed. Then we goes to the self-employed. Then we said, you left goes to the self—employed. Then we said, you left out the charities. There is now support for charities. Maybe not as much as required, but approaching just under £1 billion. Similarty, approaching just under £1 billion. Similarly, the start—ups, the small Similarty, the start-ups, the small businesses, Similarly, the start—ups, the small businesses, the entrepreneurship, there is no support for them, but there is talk of a fund with private and government supported... But that needs to be set up quickly. The squeezed middle were left out. You increased the coronavirus business increased the coronavims business interruption increased the coronavirus business interruption scheme, and hopefully will do that more. If you do this one thing, client ensure you, increase to 100%, it be worth it and increase to 10096, it be worth it and the money will increase to 100%, it be worth it and the money will flow through. Is the money will ﬂow through. Is important to the money will flow through. Is important to come back to the original question, distress, unfortunately, original question, distress, u nfortu nately, however original question, distress, unfortunately, however much we are all desperate for an exit strategy, we need to hear it spells out now. of we need to hear it spells out now. Of course, that’s not really the right way to think about this. There isn’t an exit strategy. It might be better to think about a management strategy for coronavirus. It isn’t going to be quick. There is no quick fix for this. We are not going to suddenly a period where we say we are relaxing the measures and go back to life as normal, however much we want to. This is going to be a period of extended social distancing and restrictions. Until a vaccine is in place, and that is probably sometime next year. The important thing to think about here is what are the measures we can take to are the measures we ran take to reduce are the measures we can take to reduce the overall length of time that we are restricted, with all of the economic fallout that entails? And, crucially, that comes back to what we started with testing. We have to test, we have to contact trace. If we are relaxing restrictions socially, we have to find another way of containing the vims, reducing find another way of containing the virus, reducing transmission. As Professor Niall Ferguson, who was one of the scientists on whom the Government is relying most strongly on for the modelling of this has set only this morning, testing is the “Y only this morning, testing is the way to restrict transmission, so you relax everything in the way that we are desperate to, but you have to test as well, you have to ramp it up. Lisa, you wanted to come back in? I up. Lisa, you wanted to come back in? Iagree up. Lisa, you wanted to come back in? I agree with Rachel, but I think in? Iagree with Rachel, but I think she has given in? I agree with Rachel, but I think she has given more clarity about an exit strategy than we have had from the Government. Yesterday, we had a health minister on social media saying that there would not be a lifting or an easing of these restrictions until a vaccine was in place. Effectively suggesting on Twitter that this is going to be here for 18 months. You’re talking about Nadine Dorries? If this is the use, about Nadine Dorries? If this is the case, businesses and people need a rase, businesses and people need a level of case, businesses and people need a level of understanding about that, they need the confidence in what the Government is doing and why they are doing it. I Government is doing and why they are doing it. Ithink Government is doing and why they are doing it. I think most people want doing it. I think most peopla want to do the right doing it. I think most people want to do the right thing, but this is really hard for a lot to do the right thing, but this is really ha rd for a lot of to do the right thing, but this is really hard for a lot of people. For really hard for a lot of peopla. For me, who lives really hard for a lot of people. For me, who lives with my family, who has an outside space, we’ve got a garden, this is a very different prospect from somebody who is really, really worried they are going to lose their really, really worried they are going to lose theirjob, who lives in an overcrowded ﬂat with no outside space, who has caring responsibilities or lives alone. So the Government needs to set up more clarity about how they see this developing. I appreciate they don’t want to go out mixed messages, but at the moment, that is what is happening. In a public health crisis, the public need confidence that the measures that are being put in place will work, they need to understand them and then they will follow them. Do you want to come in, brieﬂy? I follow them. Do you want to come in, brieﬂy? Itake follow them. Do you want to come in, briefly? I take response —— brieﬂy? I take response -- respectful briefly? I take response —— respectful issue with the mixed messages. We don’t want to create mixed messages, and we are not. The five tests that were set out today, and I think Rachel is right to talk about testing, it actually gives a very dear about testing, it actually gives a very clear map as to how we work our very dear map as to how we work our “Y very dear map as to how we work our way out of this. very clear map as to how we work our way out of this. The advice that is going to be given by the strategic... The Sage Group, the strategic advisory group on... The EWUP strategic advisory group on... The group that meets to deal with emergencies, they will guide the government. We will be looking at that advice as it develops over the next few weeks. And that is the approach the public would expect us to take, listening to the expert advice, and then having a programme of planned return to normality over a period. That’s clear. That is a period. That’s dear. That is something I a period. That’s clear. That is something I think the public respect, and they understand. And there is a simplicity and that which has cut through to millions of peopla. You has cut through to millions of people. You mentioned testing, new __ you people. You mentioned testing, new —— you mentioned testing. Did the Government failed to act for two months because they knew we could not respond in the same way as Germany? They managed to test, monitor and hospitalise sooner and more efficiently, therefore maintaining a much lower death rate. Karan, you have an interesting story about testing. You have had coronavirus, thankfully, it wasn’t a coronavims, thankfully, it wasn’t a pleasant coronavirus, thankfully, it wasn’t a pleasant experience, but you came out the other side. Now, the Government has talked about trying to get the Holy Grail of an antibody test. So, to get the Holy Grail of an antibody test. 50, test will tell you if to get the Holy Grail of an antibody test. So, test will tell you if you have had it, test. 50, test will tell you if you have had it, and therefore test. So, test will tell you if you have had it, and therefore you may have some degree of immunity. So far, they have not been able to get one that works. But you have managed to get that works? ﬂ Imaintain I maintain personally one of the key solutions to getting out of this crisis overall is testing. It is the World Health Organization, the head of it lead over a month ago to the hold world, test, test, test. Germany is testing half a million a week. They were testing over 100,000 a day and I am glad the government has a target to get to 100,002 weeks, and I hope they do. What weeks, and I hope they do. what works is weeks, and I hope they do. What works is when the government, the private sector, NHS, Armed Forces, they put up the Nightingale Hospital in nine days. How did you get hold of your antibody test? I will get to that, but what works is a collaboration of universities, government, I get the impression it has not happened but now I understand it is. We have the pharmaceutical companies, the laboratories and the NHS and the government working together. In my rase, government working together. In my use, when I government working together. In my case, when I had the disease, the rase, when I had the disease, the infection, I case, when I had the disease, the infection, I could not get tested. It was only allowed in hospitals and at that time, not even the NHS staff were allowed to get tested. I could not get tested and my doctor said the only way, if you want to find out, I ran the only way, if you want to find out, I can send it to a laboratory out, I ran send it to a laboratory in journey, out, I ran send it to a laboratory injourney, I out, I ran send it to a laboratory injourney, Igot out, I can send it to a laboratory injourney, I got an intravenous blood test and then you will get to know for sure. I got the result and it shows I have the antibodies. Just it shows I have the antibodies. just to be clear, it shows I have the antibodies. Just to be clear, that was a test to show you had had it? It was an antibody test. The government has the right approach in wanting to have them widely available and the our home kits, mass produced in China. There is a test to say you have got it at the moment, but the test you had is to say you had it. Yes, the antibody test. How can Karan get that and no test. How ran Karan get that and no one else test. How can Karan get that and no one else can? The government is one else ran? The government is right saying one else can? The government is right saying there’s no point in having antibody tests are widely available if you cannot rely on them. The mass produced ones, take a pinprick and it gives you an instant result, but they are giving false positives. My mother sent to a laboratory. In Germany? Why cannot laboratory. In Germany? why rannot they do that laboratory. In Germany? Why cannot they do that here? They clearly they do that here? They dearty exist, they they do that here? They clearly exist, they exist in Germany, why can’t we have them? One of the issues we found, as Karan said, we have looked to some of these tests that were available, and they did not pass muster. But this one did? Germanrs not pass muster. But this one did? Germany’s diagnostic industry is Germanrs diagnostic industry is much Germany’s diagnostic industry is much bigger than ours. But we don’t have this test at all? We are starting further back in the field than they are. Their death rate is lower because their rate of testing has been much higher. If we tested more, what are death rate to exactly the same? If we were testing much more widely we might have a different set of statistics. What we different set of statistic. what we are doing is different set of statistics. What we are doing is working to ramp it up and as Karan said we have the partnership between the public and private sector now. Just to be private sector now. just to be clear, private sector now. Just to be clear, Robert, sorry. What you seem dear, Robert, sorry. what you seem to be saying is clear, Robert, sorry. What you seem to be saying is therefore if we had tested more widely earlier, we would tested more widely eartier, we would have tested more widely earlier, we would have fewer deaths now? I think that is what you are saying? I am explaining why the German death rate is as it explaining why the German death rate knﬂh explaining why the German death rate is as it is. It is very invidious task for anybody at the moment to make direct international comparisons because we all came out this at different times, we have all taken slightly different approaches and therefore you are comparing apples with peers. There is no doubt apples with pears. There is no doubt we ran apples with peers. There is no doubt we can learn a lot from other we ran learn a lot from other countries, we can learn a lot from other countries, we’re watching very carefully what actions and steps are being taken across Europe, no doubt about that. But the particular approach will have to be tailored to domestic need and what we are facing here in the UK. I actually think the opposite in some respects. I think the international comparison between what has happened here in the UK and Germany is very revealing indeed. We know that the first cases appeared know that the first rases appeared in Germany know that the first cases appeared in Germany and the UK at almost exactly the same time. However, Germany introduced its most stringent lockdown measures a full week, just over a week before the UK. So week, just over a week before the UK. 50 that we can is absolutely UK. So that we ran is absolutely critical UK. 50 that we can is absolutely critical and it will take a long time to find out precisely how important that was in overall numbers of deaths and transmission that could have been avoided, at a time when we were still allowing the Cheltenham horse racing festival to go Cheltenham horse racing festivth go ahead Cheltenham horse racing festival to go ahead where 250,000 people crammed themselves into the stands. That is one important comparison. The other is, yes, Germany has a much better developed pharmaceutical industry, everybody agrees on that. But also, the amount of money Germany spends per capita on health Germany spends per rapita on health is significantly Germany spends per capita on health is significantly different than the UK. So is significantly different than the UK. 50 here in the NHS, we spend UK. So here in the NHS, we spend £3000 per UK. 50 here in the NHS, we spend £3000 per capita in the UK on £3000 per rapita in the UK on health. £3000 per capita in the UK on health. In Germany, that figure is SO% health. In Germany, that figure is 5096 higher, it health. In Germany, that figure is 50% higher, it is £4500 per capita. 5096 higher, it is £4500 per rapita. So go figure, 50% higher, it is £4500 per capita. So go figure, you have a starting point that is 50% more capacity in point that is 5096 more capacity in how you are point that is 50% more capacity in how you are going to manage this crisis. So how you are going to manage this crisis. 50 there is a lesson there crisis. So there is a lesson there in terms of crisis. 50 there is a lesson there in terms of how crisis. 50 there is a lesson there in terms of howl crisis. 50 there is a lesson there in terms of how I would suggest we fund our health service, because we would be better able to manage the pandemic if we had a stronger starting point. On the point of testing, there is another crucial difference between Germany and the UK. That is, to begin with our strategy was broadly the same, it was to test every case and was to test every rase and rigorously was to test every case and rigorously contact race. 50 the moment rigorously contact race. So the moment you identified a case, you moment you identified a use, you trace moment you identified a case, you trace everybody else, you shut them down and self isolated them to try and stop transmission. There was a point of course in the UK, at which the government changed strategy. On the basis of the advice they were given, to abandon testing and contract testing in the community with many epidemiologists would argue with pretty catastrophic fall. Pub“: argue with pretty catastrophic fall. Public Health England said in March the 26, I think it was Public Health England said in March the 26, I think it wasJennifer the 26, I think it was jennifer Harris, the 26, I think it wasJennifer Harris, there comes a point in a pandemic when testing every case is pandemic when testing every rase is not an pandemic when testing every case is not an intervention. Yes, it was Jenny not an intervention. Yes, it was jenny Harris not an intervention. Yes, it was Jenny Harris who said that. Was that jenny Harris who said that. Was that right? I jenny Harris who said that. Was that right? Iwould Jenny Harris who said that. Was that right? I would defer to the World Health Organization on this, I am not an epidemiologist. But the World Health Organization have been clear, the way you address any infectious outbreak is test, test, test. It is one of the most important measures you ran take. one of the most important measures you can take. That is what happens you ran take. That is what happens in Ebola, for you can take. That is what happens in Ebola, for instance and in China and many other countries. And I would exercise a note of caution, it may be your test was a very good test, but I think Chris Whitty, the test, but I think Chris whitty, the Chief test, but I think Chris Whitty, the Chief Medical Officer and Patrick Vallance, the Chief Medical Officer and Patrick Valiance, the chief scientific Vallance, the chief scientific officer, Valiance, the chief scientific officer, are absolutely right when they stress caution about diving in and starting to mass produce a test where we actually have not rigorously, scientifically validated it. The one I am talking about, the one that is required in large volumes, the want to see if you have got it, one company is ready to sunplv got it, one company is ready to supply1 million a week who have been supplyi million a week who have been accredited around the world. Why been accredited around the world. why aren’t been accredited around the world. Why aren’t these tests are being why aren’t these tests are being made Why aren’t these tests are being made available. They can be tested, made available. They ran be tested, if they don’t made available. They can be tested, if they don’t have the virus, they ran go into if they don’t have the virus, they can go into work. We should have ran go into work. We should have that testing can go into work. We should have that testing capability. Lisa, you have been listening very patiently, so I find it very extraordinary to have somebody in the studio who has had an antibody test knowing the Prime Minister has been saying, this is the holy Grail and someone has had one from Germany. The question is very specific, did the government failed to act for two months because we knew we couldn’t respond the same as Germany, we didn’t have the wherewithal, what is your response? The honest answer is, we don’t know. And while we will have to unpick And whila we will have to unpick what And while we will have to unpick what has happened and what has gone wrong when this is over, we have an immediate crisis we are trying to deal with. immediate crisis we are trying to dealwith. It immediate crisis we are trying to deal with. It is widely acknowledged we were too slow to recognise the stale we were too slow to recognise the scale of the problem and to implement lockdown and there was real confusion at the outset, about what the government’s strategy was. There were suggestions in the media they were pursuing a strategy of herd immunity where people would get herd immunity where peopla would get it and herd immunity where people would get it and then the population would become immune. Labour was very become immune. labour was very supportive of become immune. Labour was very supportive of the strategy, certainly at the very beginning? We were pushing quite hard for lockdown before it happened. I think it was becoming apparent from other countries, as well from the UK, that was important and people were being put at risk. If you remember, it took put at risk. If you remember, it tookjeremy put at risk. If you remember, it tookJeremy Hunt to come out and tookjeremy Hunt to come out and push the tookJeremy Hunt to come out and push the government on contact tracing and testing before we started to get some action. The thing that is important now, broadly speaking the government has accepted how important this is and is doing, I believe sincerely, everything they ran to try to I believe sincerely, everything they can to try to get access to those ran to try to get access to those tests. can to try to get access to those tests. Matt Hancock set a target of 100,000 tests which will have to be hit in a couple of weeks and it doesn’t look, from the figures that name doesn’t look, from the figures that came out this week, that we are anywhere near of making progress on those things as we should be. I think it is really important that we have a much bigger and renewed focus on that. But I would also just take you back to this point about having a better understanding and a more honest assessment and appraisal from government about their strategy to move the country on from this moment when it is safe and appropriate to do so. Because there is a concern about the antibody tests that has been raised by a number of behavioural scientist, with people behavioural scientist, with peopla under behavioural scientist, with people under financial pressure to return to work, you could end up with a situation where people felt pressure to go and get the virus in order they could go and get on with their lives. I don’t think most people lives. I don’t think most peopla would lives. I don’t think most people would do that, but I think we have to be really, really careful about how we communicate with the public about how we are going to get out of this crisis. Otherwise you could have unintended consequences and that’s why the government needs to be much, much clearer about when they anticipate we are going with this. I they anticipate we are going with this. Iaccept they anticipate we are going with this. I accept this is a moving thing that moves very fast and we are going to have to respond to the science and adjust the strategy accordingly, but we have got to be more open with the public about what we are doing and why. Lisa makes a point about behaviour. That is what Sage will be doing, they will be understanding that before they advise the government. All the things being talked about are being done but we want to make sure we are in a position to make sure we have a much more conclusive picture. The question is about testing, Robert. The government or Matt Hancock has committed to 100,000 tests a day in a four night. We are currently at 35,000 capacity. —— fortnight. 35,000 capacity. -- fortnight. Nothing like 35,000 capacity. —— fortnight. Nothing like that is being carried out. Only two weeks to go, are you going to do it? It is a big challange, going to do it? It is a big challenge, but look at how far we challange, but look at how far we have challenge, but look at how far we have come already. Matt Hancock is confident that with the partnerships we have now set confident that with the partnerships we have now setup, confident that with the partnerships we have now set up, we can confident that with the partnerships we have now setup, we can do that. we have now set up, we ran do that. Look how far we have now setup, we can do that. Look how far we have come in six weeks. We have achieved huge strides in terms of the way we are tackling this. How are you going to get to that target? We have to be ambitious and it would be mealy—mouthed of us and it would be meaty-mouthed of us to say it would and it would be mealy—mouthed of us to say it would be easy to hit. Do you have some expectation of meeting it? We have to set a target that is a challenge. It is a huge challenge and we have set that to the community who deal with this and we are confident we can get there. We are confident we ran get there. We are making very are confident we can get there. We are making very good progress. We will be back in two weeks and we will find out. Let’s take a question from Richard Clarke. The UK started wearing facemasks, in countries like japan, wearing facemasks, in countries like Japan, Singapore and China, the japan, Singapore and China, the death Japan, Singapore and China, the death rate from this virus is significantly less than it is here. Facemasks have proven to help stop the spread of this virus onto someone else, so why aren’t we using them? It may be awhile before restrictions are eased in the UK so would this be a good time to ask a [oral clothing would this be a good time to ask a local clothing manufacture, a lot of [oral clothing manufacture, a lot of them in local clothing manufacture, a lot of them in Wolverhampton, to manufacture as many facemasks as possibla and manufacture as many facemasks as possible and post them to households possibla and post them to households in possible and post them to households in the region. It could provide a possible shortage issue further down the line. Should we be wearing facemasks, Rachel? It is a very interesting question. The W still interesting question. The w still 5575 interesting question. The w still says no, their interesting question. The W still says no, their advice is not to recommend that general members of the public should wear face masks. They have some very good reasons for concern. If you wear a mask, you are more likely to touch your face and we know one of the main routes of transmission of this virus of infection is, you have picked it up on your hands and then you touch either your nose, your eyes or your mouth. If you have something across your face that invites you to touch your face, it potentially increases the risk of you infecting yourself. There is another behavioural issue here which is the perception, if you are wearing a mask you are somehow more protected so you may be more inclined to undertake riskier behaviours. You may not socially distance in the same way you would otherwise. There are some real concerns around facemasks. The flip concerns around facemasks. The ﬂip side of concerns around facemasks. The flip side of that is, there is no randomised control trial evidence for whether or not facemasks are beneficial or not in the case of beneficial or not in the use of coronavims, beneficial or not in the case of coronavirus, Covid—19 specifically. coronavims, Covid-19 specifically. We do coronavirus, Covid—19 specifically. We do have some evidence for other viruses, but not this virus. Lots of viruses, but not this vims. Lots of countries viruses, but not this virus. Lots of countries are enforcing, Japan, countries are enforcing, japan, South countries are enforcing, Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong and then the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany, (‘zech Republic, Slovakia, Germany, France, Spain Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany, France, Spain they are all either saying people have to wear them or they are encouraging it. This is not necessarily what the public assume to be the case. There are two to be the rase. There are two reasons to be the case. There are two reasons for wearing a mask. One is to decrease your risk of being infected and the other is to decrease your risk of infecting other people if you, unbeknownst to other peopla if you, unbeknownst to yourself, have other people if you, unbeknownst to yourself, have the virus. You may be yourself, have the vims. You may be asymptomatic. yourself, have the virus. You may be asymptomatic. You may unknowingly be spreading it to other people. A cloth mask is pretty rubbish as a A doth mask is pretty rubbish as a form of A cloth mask is pretty rubbish as a form of protection for you, against other peopla form of protection for you, against other people coughing virus other peopla coughing virus partidas other people coughing virus particles over you. It might help a partidas over you. It might help a little bit. particles over you. It might help a little bit. But in terms of use, if you are infected, protecting other people from you transmitting the peopla from you transmitting the virus to people from you transmitting the virus to them, then actually there is evidence that a cloth mask reduces the amount of virus particles that you are generating to partidas that you are generating to a 36th particles that you are generating to a 36th of what it would have been. I was listening to Patrick Valiance, was listening to Patrick Vallance, the was listening to Patrick Valiance, the chief scientific adviser on Monday, he said that masks don’t necessarily protect the general public, but they do help in stopping you transmitting it to others. That stmck me you transmitting it to others. That struck me come in a pandemic, as a stmck me come in a pandemic, as a pretty good thing struck me come in a pandemic, as a pretty good thing to aim for. What pretty good thing to aim for. what is the pretty good thing to aim for. What is the Labour view? Does Labour have is the labour view? Does labour have a view on is the Labour view? Does Labour have a view on masks? Well, I’m not a scientist. I would definitely be guided by people who are in terms of the advice that is given. This week, we had a situation where the of New York governor came out and said that peopla will only York governor came out and said that people will only be allowed out in peopla will only be allowed out in pub“: peopla will only be allowed out in public if people will only be allowed out in public if they are wearing face masks. That has caused a lot of concern for people in this country, concern for peoplc in this country, many of whom concern for people in this country, many of whom are not on lockdown. I know we keep talking about lockdown, but a lot of my constituents are still going out to work every day. Some of them are transport workers, they work in food production, as well as the care sectors. But others well as the rare sectors. But others are simply well as the care sectors. But others are simply going to work in car part are simply going to work in far part companies or are simply going to work in car part companies or construction sites. companies or constmction sites. They are companies or construction sites. They are going to work in warehouses, packing boxes for a minimum wage. And the number of reports I have had from employees in those industries about employers who are not following the government guidance, they are not allowing their employees to work from home if they ran, they their employees to work from home if they can, they are not following and they ran, they are not following and enforcing they can, they are not following and enforcing social distance measures, and they are not putting in place proper hand washing facilities, they are really, really worried about these reports about face masks. Because a face masks are needed, they obviously need them. I think there is a couple of things that the Government could do quickly. The first is to provide a level of clarity about that, especially for peopla clarity about that, especially for people that are going out and peopla that are going out and working on people that are going out and working on the front line. The second thing that I think they could do as well is to take seriously this issue that there are many people whose employers are currently putting them at risk. I think most businesses are trying to do the right thing. But I have been overwhelmed reports from people across the north—west that are across the north-west that are dealing with across the north—west that are dealing with this, and I know that many mayors and council leaders have as well. I would urge the Government to take action to protect people. I to take action to protect peopla. I think Lisa to take action to protect people. I think Lisa makes a really good point about the way that companies are treating their employees at this time. The test of leadership is not in good times, it’s in bad times. If a company puts people first, that is a company puts peopla first, that is the most a company puts people first, that is the most important thing, the safety and welfare of their people. When it and welfare of their people. when it comes to and welfare of their people. When it comes to masks, I realised when I went to japan comes to masks, I realised when I went to Japan for the first time, went to japan for the first time, when I went to Japan for the first time, when I saw people wearing masks, I when I saw peopla wearing masks, I was then when I saw people wearing masks, I was then explained that actually, they want to stop you getting infected. So, that aspect of it... The debate has been about whether it protect yourself, but Patrick Vallance said it can stop the transmission. I thought, Vallance said it can stop the transmission. Ithought, surely, that’s worth having? I respect the “Y that’s worth having? I respect the way the Government has been dealing with this, they have been listening to the scientists, we have all been following what scientists advise us. Maybe they will come round to saying we need to use masks. It might happen. Derek Hunter says it is so difficult to buy any facemasks in order to protect yourself. Many outlets online are charging over the outlats online are charging over the odds for outlets online are charging over the odds for masks, and that is before you add in postage and packing. What you add in postage and packing. what is happening you add in postage and packing. What is happening with masks? We know that the Government is reviewing the guidelines. Is it partly because we haven’t got enough? Or is it that the Government hasn’t decided on this? I think the point was put dearty this? I think the point was put clearly about the evidence on this. dearty about the evidence on this. I think clearly about the evidence on this. I think when you haven’t got clear evidence that masks are going to make that key difference, then we shouldn’t be privatising that. Why shouldn’t be privatising that. why are all shouldn’t be privatising that. Why are all these other countries doing it? That seems puzzling to the it? That seems puuling to the people it? That seems puzzling to the people contacting us. The World peopla contacting us. The World Health people contacting us. The World Health Organization advice is relevant, advice of medical and scientific officers is relevant. There are different types of masks, there are plain cloth masks, there are plain doth masks, surgical there are plain cloth masks, surgical masks that are going to be of real help to people that are of real help to peopla that are doing dose of real help to people that are doing close work, close contact work doing dose work, close contact work in hospitals or doing close work, close contact work in hospitals or other places. There is a dear in hospitals or other places. There is a clear case therefore masks. But is a dear rase therefore masks. But for the general is a clear case therefore masks. But for the general public? I have listened carefully and I take the point that you wear a mask to stop you transmitting any particles or you transmitting any partidas or disease you transmitting any particles or disease to other people. I think we are looking very carefully at the evidence on this. And we are constantly asking ourselves questions about the strength or otherwise of it, and then taking action. But at the moment, it’s right to prioritise those other types of PPE that are clearly needed types of PPE that are dearty needed and are going types of PPE that are clearly needed and are going to make a difference in terms of the transmission of this disease. Coming to the other part of the question, it’s fair to say Government was caught out on a PPE, in terms of not having enough, or as much as peopla in terms of not having enough, or as much as people require, Richard is much as peopla require, Richard is saying much as people require, Richard is saying wouldn’t it be good to get ahead of this on facemasks and start asking [oral ahead of this on facemasks and start asking local manufacturers to stop asking [oral manufacturers to stop making them. asking local manufacturers to stop making them. Wouldn’t it be good to get in there early? The question of get in there earty? The question of getting in get in there early? The question of getting in there early, we have getting in there earty, we have already getting in there early, we have already ramped up the operation of PPE. Put facemasks in particular? If the evidence changes and we are told that facemasks are necessary, I’m confident we can ramp it up. We do confident we ran ramp it up. We do have the ability confident we can ramp it up. We do have the ability to do that. We have shown in other areas that we can do shown in other areas that we ran do that. Let’s shown in other areas that we can do that. Let’s follow that evidence and assess it regularly. There are two assess it regularty. There are two important assess it regularly. There are two important points, I would suggest. One is whether or not the general pub“: One is whether or not the general public should be wearing simple cloth facemasks, in order to reduce transmission of this virus to other peopla. The transmission of this virus to other people. Thejury transmission of this virus to other people. The jury is out there, the WHO is still not advising that. At many national countries and New York, as you said, most definitely are. It would be helpful to know when the Government is going to give the public a definitive answer on that. I don’t think the evidence is going to change quickly. It would be helpful to know that sooner rather than later. The second point is about the PPE that we most definitely know it is needed, and is needed desperately on the front line. That is the PPE that is protecting front line staff, whether NHS or carers, from infection. And we know that there are huge problems with capacity there. They are not unique to the UK, there are problems all over the world. But we also have a country in lockdown right now. So we have all of these SMEs, small and medium—sized businesses, so many medium-sized businesses, so many peopla up and medium—sized businesses, so many people up and down the country that peopla up and down the country that are not working people up and down the country that are not working currently, where is the national government led effort to boost production? Rachel, about 20 seconds left? British businesses there to step up to the mark. Burberry is already making them. We just heard just heard Barbour is making masks. We are out of time, I’m afraid. Just We are out of time, I’m afraid. just in time is off We are out of time, I’m afraid. Just in time is off air next week. We will be back the week after, which is, of course, April the 30th. Tonight, our recorded questions came from Wolverhampton. In two weeks we would like to take questions from Leeds. You can’t come to the studio, not for some time, I suspect. And we need to hear from you. Question Time without an audience, even without an -- even virtually, without an audience, even without an —— even virtually, is not the same. -- even virtually, is not the same. So go to the —— even virtually, is not the same. So go to the website and apply in the usual way. You can record your the usual way. You ran record your question on your the usual way. You can record your question on your phone or we will give you advice on how to do it. If you want to carry on the discussion, what we have been talking about, as always, you ran what we have been talking about, as always, you canjoin Adrian Chiles always, you ranjoin Adrian Chiles and guests on always, you canjoin Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time. Thanks very much to the panel for coming into the studio. Lisa, thanks for for coming into the studio. Lisa, thanks forjoining us from Wigan. thanks for joining us from wigan. Thank you to thanks forjoining us from Wigan. Thank you to everybody he recorded a question or got in touch during the programme. From Question Time, for this week, we will see you in two weeks. Goodbye.