Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, James Cleverly, tonight’s panel, james Cleverty, former tonight’s panel, James Cleverly, former chair of the Conservative Party during last year’s election, now a minister at the Foreign Office, Labour now a minister at the Foreign Office, Labourshadow now a minister at the Foreign Office, Labour shadow secretary for international trade. She was Shadow Foreign Secretary under international trade. She was Shadow Foreign Secretary underJeremy Foreign Secretary under jeremy Corbyn and Foreign Secretary underJeremy Corbyn and a candidate in the contest to become leader of the Party. contest to become leader of the party, Emily Thornberry. A former investment banker and MP since 2015, currently leader of the SNP at Westminster, Ian Blackford. Fraser Nelson, a journalist whose career began on the Times and the Scotsman. Since 2009, he has been editor of the right—leaning Spectator. And the the right-leaning Spectator. And the bishop the right—leaning Spectator. And the bishop October, previously chapter in bishop October, previously chaplain to the House of Commons and the first black woman to become a bishop, Rose Hudson—Wilkin. Welcome bishop, Rose Hudson-Wilkin. Welcome to my guest in bishop, Rose Hudson—Wilkin. Welcome to my guest in the studio Philip Fraser, welcome to you down the line, and welcome to our virtual audience from Windsor. Thank you for joining us. Talking to you at home for top you ran joining us. Talking to you at home for top you canjoin in joining us. Talking to you at home for top you can join in the conversation in the usual way on social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s take our social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s take ourfirst social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s take our first question tonight, which is from Mike Unger. with the tonight, which is from Mike Unger. With the release of the findings related to Priti Patel’s reported billing of related to Priti Patel’s reported billing of civil servants, if she is found to have broken the ministerial code, should she go? A story which broke earlier this evening. Emily. broke eartier this evening. Emily. What broke eartier this evening. Emily. what we broke earlier this evening. Emily. What we have heard is that Boris what we have heard is that Boris johnson is What we have heard is that Boris Johnson is basically What we have heard is that Boris Johnson is basicallyjust going to johnson is basically just going to give her a rap Johnson is basicallyjust going to give her a rap over the knuckles. I think we need to see the report. The allocations that I have heard our lyric, to say allocations that I have heard our lyrics, to say the least. I think lyric, to say the least. I think it’s an lyrics, to say the least. I think it’s an extreme example of billing in the workplace, and I think people in the workplace, and I think peopla should be in the workplace, and I think people should be measured by the same measure, so, if Priti Patel had been a senior civil servant, how would she have been treated? I think we should treat a minister in the same way, and I think it is a serious lapse of way, and I think it is a serious lapse ofjudgment by the Prime Minister to simply rap over the knuckles. We don’t yet know that is what he is going to do. That’s what I heard. If he doesn’t, that’s fine... Cue do you think Priti Patel should lose her fine... Cue do you think Priti Patel should lose herjob? of step one, we should lose her job? of step one, we should see should lose herjob? of step one, we should see the full report and get her to come to Parliament and answer her to come to Partiament and answer on her her to come to Parliament and answer on her behaviour. From what one hears, this is very serious and the government is not taking it sufficiently seriously. These allegations were made in February. In a resignation statement by the most senior civil servant in the Home Office, Sir Philip Rutnam, who was suing for unfair dismissal, he’s talked about allegations of shouting and swearing, belittling people, and swearing, belittling peopla, making and swearing, belittling people, making unreasonable demands, behaviour creating fear, and it needed some bravery to pull out. This is what he accuses Home Secretary Priti Patel of doing. She has a was denied it. There is a report on BBC Newsnight tonight and other places saying that the draft report suggests that evidence of bullying has been found by Priti Patel. James. Well, I haven’t seen Patel. james. Well, I haven’t seen the report, and I Patel. James. Well, I haven’t seen the report, and I am incredibly uncomfortable speculating about the content of a report that I haven’t seen or pontificating about what seen or pontifirating about what actions seen or pontificating about what actions might be taken from that. I know Priti Patel very well. She is a neighbouring MP of mine, and I have known her long before either she or I became MPs. And I think that my observation of her is that she has always expected and demanded that people work hard, and I think that peopla work hard, and I think that that is a people work hard, and I think that that is a completely legitimate attitude to take into government. The Home Office particularly as the The Home Office particularty as the department The Home Office particularly as the department that keeps us safe. It has to deal with some incredibly important and sensitive issues, and that does mean that people need to be decisive, people need to be hard—working, and it is the be decisive, people need to be hard—working, and it is thejob be decisive, people need to be hard—working, and it is the job of hard-working, and it is the job of ministers hard—working, and it is the job of ministers to make sure departments function at their optimal output. Not by bullying people. You don’t Not by bullying peopla. You don’t get optimal Not by bullying people. You don’t get optimal output by bullying peopla, get optimal output by bullying people, do you? Edge I took across peopla, do you? Edge I took across them, people, do you? Edge I took across them, perhaps? You don’t do it by billing peopla, them, perhaps? You don’t do it by billing people, do you know that. If billing peopla, do you know that. If she has billing people, do you know that. If she has been bullying people, don’t you think she should go? As I say, I’m not going to speculate on a report I haven’t read. There seems to be some suggestion that this, that, if she was bullying, it was not intentional, and therefore that might make it less of a problem. might make it lass of a problem. Does might make it less of a problem. Does that hold water? Well, I don’t want to sound like a broken record, you are asking me to spectate on a report that I haven’t seen. On what is an important and sensitive issue, and that is why I am uncomfortable doing so, but it is the and that is why I am uncomfortable doing so, but it is thejob of ministers to make sure that departments deliver. Chemical I don’t think anyone is doubting that. It’s just the way one goes about it. These departments are delivering for the British people, and it is a minister’s the British people, and it is a minister’sjob to make the British people, and it is a minister’s job to make sure they do so. There is never any excuse for not treating people with respect, but then again ministers do need to demand pretty high standards on behalf of the voters, who sent them into office. In the Home Office especially, there will be lots of very difficult conversations. The big question is where you draw the line between a difficult conversation in saying this isn’t good enough, I expect you to do better, if that’s what she did, and bullying. It’s pretty difficult to know that because we have no idea what is in the report. The leak of it, as far as we know, says that she broke some protocol but not necessarily broke the ministerial code. We will have to wait to see. If it was a major breach of the ministerial code, you can expert her ministerial code, you ran expert her to go in Boris ministerial code, you can expert her to go in BorisJohnson’s next reshuffle. From the start of this, reshufﬂe. From the start of this, there reshuffle. From the start of this, there have been lots of contradictory reports about what she did and didn’t do, whether she was simply demanding that her department live up to the expectations that voters set or whether she did go over the line. I guess it won’t be long before we find out. Lets hear what you have got to say. Marina. It is Anti-Bullying what you have got to say. Marina. It is Anti—Bullying Week and we are is Anti-Bullying Week and we are trying to is Anti—Bullying Week and we are trying to educate leadership to our children to reduce bullying, so it’s really disappointing to hear children to reduce bullying, so it’s really disappointing to hearJames really disappointing to hear james issue really disappointing to hearJames issue that assertive behaviour that strays into billing is acceptable in any leadership position for them they should be zero tolerance of they should be zero tolarance of this they should be zero tolerance of this behaviour. In fairness, I don’t think you were saying... We haven’t seen the report and I think it is deeply unfair, starting to pass judgment on somebody who takes the protection of our nation and the peopla protection of our nation and the people within it incredibly seriously. Caroline. I people within it incredibly seriously. Caroline. Ijust echo what Marina says, and absolutely I agree with James, this is all speculation, but if the report does say that she has been displaying bullying behaviour, absolutely I think she should go. She is in such a senior position and, as Marina said, she is a senior person and this is not a role model we want. this is not a rola model we want. You ran this is not a role model we want. You can have a decisive, industrious, hard working without it being bullying. This is a question to the whole panel, but specifically james. If to the whole panel, but specifically James. If there were allegations of james. If there were allegations of bullying that James. If there were allegations of bullying that you found in your staff, what would you do about it personally I am just going to go a bit further, if I made. Ruth. bit further, ifI made. Ruth. Listening to bit further, if I made. Ruth. Listening to James, I think what Listening to james, I think what happened to Listening to James, I think what happened to being innocent until proven guilty, given that nobody has had sight of this report it stop not only has nobody seen this report but Priti Patel is strongly denied she had bullied anybody for the let’s deal with the principles of this because, in the last Parliament, because, in the last Partiament, Theresa May because, in the last Parliament, Theresa May brought all party leaders together to make sure that Parliament was taking its responsibilities over bullying and sexual misconduct, and we have to [ad by sexual misconduct, and we have to lead by example. We have to show leadership and we have to make it very dear leadership and we have to make it very clear that those that work in Partiament, very clear that those that work in Parliament, those that work elsewhere in society needs the fullest protection from this kind of thing. And I think there has to be a certain amount of honour in all of us in making sure that we discharge our response abilities in the right way. We can’t take judgment ourselves tonight on Priti Patel because we haven’t seen the report, and I think Emily is right, this report should be published. I think it is in the public interest that it is. If it is the case that there is is. If it is the rase that there is a serious is. If it is the case that there is a serious breach of the ministerial code, there ought to be consequences but, I have to say, if that is the use, what but, I have to say, if that is the case, what should happen in the rase, what should happen in the first case, what should happen in the first instance is that anybody who is guilty of a serious breach of the ministerial code should not wait to be sacked, they should take their responsibility and they should resign, because that is the way we used to do things in public life in this country, that is the kind of standard we should be held to. Interesting from your perspective, given that you were chaplain at Westminster. I’ve only given that you were chaplain at Westminster. I’ve onlyjust heard Westminster. I’ve only just heard about this, I Westminster. I’ve onlyjust heard about this, I think I would want to see the report and to hear what is being said, she is being accused of, and also what the report itself has thrown up, and for due process to take place. I believe passionately that bullying of any form is unacceptable, and so we must wait. Let’s not be rushed to make a Let’s not be mshed to make a judgment at Let’s not be rushed to make a judgment at this time. Let’s wait and see and hope that due process judgment at this time. Let’s wait and see and hope that due process will be followed. I am going and see and hope that due process will be followed. I am going to take another question but, first, we are looking for people to join our looking for peopla to join our virtual looking for people to join our virtual audience, looking for people to join our virtualaudience, like looking for people to join our virtual audience, like everybody joining us from Windsor tonight. Next week, we will be in Swansea and the week after that in Bath so, if you live in either of those places or thereabouts, get in touch at the website. You can fill in the online website. You ran fill in the online form. It website. You can fill in the online form. It would be great to see you ﬂip let’s take a form. It would be great to see you flip let’s take a second question, ﬂip let’s take a second question, which is flip let’s take a second question, which is from Elliot Williams. flip let’s take a second question, which is from Elliot Williams. Should the government which is from Elliot Williams. Should the governmentjust allow families to meet up over the Christmas holidays if people are Christmas holidays if peopla are going to be Christmas holidays if people are going to be breaking the rules going to be breaking the mles anyway, going to be breaking the rules anyway, what is it a case of going to be breaking the rules anyway, what is it a case ofjust anyway, what is it a use ofjust some peopla anyway, what is it a case ofjust some people spoiling it for the rest some peopla spoiling it for the rest of us just eat a some people spoiling it for the rest of us just eat a few sprouts? I love sprouts, actually the top do you think, Elliott? I sprouts, actually the top do you think, Elliott? Ican sprouts, actually the top do you think, Elliott? I can very much think, Elliott? I ran very much empathise think, Elliott? I can very much empathise with people like myself, empathise with peopla like myself, who empathise with people like myself, who have family members with a lot of peopla, a lot who have family members with a lot of people, a lot of elderly people, of peopla, a lot of elderty peopla, and I really of people, a lot of elderly people, and I really want to see them all year round, and I really want to see them all year round next year as well, so if there is any chance of me getting these vulnerable people any ill, we don’t want to be doing that but, if you are going to break the mles, I’m that but, if you are going to break the rules, I’m not going to lie, I the mles, I’m not going to lie, I am tempted. I the rules, I’m not going to lie, I am tempted. I want to come up from our audience, a show of hands. I’m not sure I’m going to be able to answer this question! Who is answer this question! who is thinking answer this question! Who is thinking they might answer this question! Who is thinking they mightjust have to get the family wrote a Christmas, come what may? 0h, the family wrote a Christmas, come what may? Oh, come on! You are all favouring about it. That’s interesting. Rose, I’m going to ask 7°“- interesting. Rose, I’m going to ask you, because of your interesting. Rose, I’m going to ask you, because of yourjob, and Christmas is a critical time of year for those that follow the Christian tradition in this country, but this year, should people accept perhaps they can’t be together? It’s quite possible because of the pandemic that we will not be able to celebrate Christmas in the way we have always celebrated it. I think have always celabrated it. I think we have always celebrated it. I think we shouldn’t be waiting for government to make laws about this. I think we, as a community, should act responsibly. What does that act responsibly. what does that mean, not act responsibly. What does that mean, not having grandpa Auchrannie over? It means we need to behave in a way that is going to protect those who are most vulnerable. My family are scattered all over the country and I would desperately love to have my wonderful, gorgeous grandchildren with me, but it might not happen, and I think we need to be patient and accept our reality for what it is and make sure that we protect those who are most vulnerable. Right now, in Swale and Thanet, the infection rate is over 600 and 500. That is exceptionally high. In the church, we have worked with government to ensure that protection of those most vulnerable. We have also worked to ensure that our churches are Covid safe, we are not gathering in large groups, and it’s not just about the church. There gathering in large groups, and it’s notjust about the church. There are not just about the church. There are those who notjust about the church. There are those who are interfaith brothers and sisters. Eid, a big festival, Diwali, and I don’t know what will happen with Hannukah, so we are in it together. Let’s just be patient and let’s do the right thing. Let’s hear from our and let’s do the right thing. Let’s hearfrom our audience. and let’s do the right thing. Let’s hear from our audience. John. and let’s do the right thing. Let’s hearfrom ouraudience. John. I hear from our audience. john. I totally agree hearfrom ouraudience. John. I totally agree with Rose, thank you for saying that. A lot of local businesses have put so much investment into becoming Covid safe, just to have that whipped away at the last moment, just before Christmas, just getting some money back. I Christmas, just getting some money back. lam hearing Christmas, just getting some money back. I am hearing that, Christmas, just getting some money back. lam hearing that, if Christmas, just getting some money back. I am hearing that, if we have back. lam hearing that, ifwe have these five days back. I am hearing that, if we have these five days around Christmas, there are going to be 25 days of lockdown in January for the where there are going to be 25 days of lockdown inJanuary for the where is lockdown in january for the where is the logic in lockdown inJanuary for the where is the logic in that? I don’t understand it. I the logic in that? I don’t understand it. Iwant the logic in that? I don’t understand it. I want to know how we help the business that have invested so much money into making sure their businesses are safe, and to Rose’s point, it is down to personal responsibility for the why do we need Boris Johnson responsibility for the why do we need BorisJohnson to tell us how we need Boris johnson to tell us how we should need BorisJohnson to tell us how we should live our daily life? It’s down to us as individuals. To protect ourselves and others. There are many of us who, around Eid, could not get together with loved ones. We made it work and used Zoom and other facilities. ones. We made it work and used Zoom and otherfacilities. You have to and other facilities. You have to make it and otherfacilities. You have to make it work and be sensible. Thank Martin. Would it not be more appropriate for people to meet in their own homes rather than meeting “P their own homes rather than meeting up in large supermarkets purchasing nonessential goods? Right, 0K up in large supermarkets purchasing nonessential goods? Right, OKfirst nonessential goods? Right, 0K first “P nonessential goods? Right, 0K first up nobody nonessential goods? Right, OKfirst up nobody should be going to supermarkets either put up Elliott, should the government allow people to meet up over Christmas if people to meet up over Christmas if peopla are going to meet up over Christmas if people are going break the rules anyway because of nature of hands, quite a few people are thinking, well, I am few peopla are thinking, well, I am just going to few people are thinking, well, I am just going to get my family over whatever. That has to be part of the compilation for the government, doesn’t it? I’v e I’ve been really impressed, not so much surprised, but really impressed by how, for the most part, people by how, for the most part, peopla have by how, for the most part, people have been careful and thoughtful and have taken have been careful and thoughtful and have ta ken really have been careful and thoughtful and have taken really sensible precautions. It is really sad when important religious festivals have been so heavily disrupted. We’ve been so heavily dismpted. We’ve already been so heavily disrupted. We’ve already mentioned Eid, Easter, holy week for. . . already mentioned Eid, Easter, holy week for... We know all that, James, week for... We know all that, james, but what ran you week for... We know all that, James, but what can you tell us about what but what ran you tell us about what will happen? but what can you tell us about what will happen? The guidelines we have put forward have always been guided by the science and there has always been a balancing act. 50 this idea been a balancing act. So this idea that five days been a balancing act. 50 this idea that five days of getting together at Christmas might lead to a month of lockdown? I know there’s a lot of speculation about what might be announced and obviously the Prime Minister will let us know what the guideline changes might be, but our response to coronavirus has not been dictated by events in the diary, it’s been dictated by the epidemiology. But hang on, Boris johnson has epidemiology. But hang on, Boris Johnson has referred to Christmas johnson has referred to Christmas many times Johnson has referred to Christmas many times and we know it is important and it’s something he is factoring into decision and has dearty factoring into decision and has clearly talked about that he knows dearty talked about that he knows everyone clearly talked about that he knows everyone wants to be together for Christmas. Yes, but the guidelines, and we don’t know what they are and we will be guided by the science, because people want to get together, not just because people want to get together, notjust people of the Christian not just peopla of the Christian faith, but notjust people of the Christian faith, but Christmas is traditionally a time of people of traditionally a time of peopla of all traditionally a time of people of all faiths or none to get together, and that emotional safety net is actually really important. Throughout the government response to the pandemic, it’s about being able to or trying as best as we can able to or trying as best as we ran to balance able to or trying as best as we can to balance the public health, people’s personal health, the economic health, the emotional and psychological health of the country, and none of these things are easy and they are all finely balanced and the whole world is having to learn the whola world is having to learn on the whole world is having to learn on the job, the whola world is having to learn on the job, but the whole world is having to learn on the job, but we do want, as long as it ran be on the job, but we do want, as long as it can be done safely, people to as it ran be done safely, peopla to enjoy as it ran be done safely, people to enjoy each as it can be done safely, people to enjoy each other’s company at a really enjoy each other’s company at a really important part of the year. Ian? This is a terrible time for everybody and as politicians, we should thank the public for the way that peopla should thank the public for the way that people have behaved. The fact that peopla have behaved. The fact that peopla that people have behaved. The fact that people have had to make sacrifices for so long, the fact that peopla sacrifices for so long, the fact that people have lost loved ones and that peopla have lost loved ones and have not that people have lost loved ones and have not been able to grieve in the right way. We know there is some hope with the vaccine, although it will take time to roll this out and we have to be careful about managing expectations as we go through this. What are the expectations for people what are the expectations for people in What are the expectations for people in Scotland in terms of getting together at Christmas? Is it likely to happen? One thing I will say is that the four governments will work together over this because we need to make sure that there are opportunities where it is appropriate for people to travel. appropriate for peopla to travel. Does appropriate for people to travel. Does that mean we won’t see Nicola Sturgeon making an announcement before the UK Government? That has happened fairly frequently through happened fairty frequently through the happened fairly frequently through the pandemic. I am not saying critically, I’m the pandemic. I am not saying critically, I’mjust the pandemic. I am not saying critically, I’m just saying it’s a fact and are you saying she won’t do that on this occasion? We obviously have responsibility for health in Scotland on the First Minister makes announcements at the daily press briefings in front of Parliament and briefings in front of Partiament and we are briefings in front of Parliament and we are dictated by that timetable we are dictated by that timetabla and I we are dictated by that timetable and I hope people respect the decisions taken, the announcements have been done in good faith given the responsibility is because of the epidemiology that the responsibility is because of the epidemiology thatJames has the responsibility is because of the epidemiology that James has talked epidemiology that james has talked about. epidemiology that James has talked about. But we are in a situation where we took earlier action in Scotland to tighten things in September and we are beginning to see some encouraging signs. It is earty, but see some encouraging signs. It is early, but there are encouraging earty, but there are encouraging signs that early, but there are encouraging signs that the numbers are declining. All of us want to give peopla hope declining. All of us want to give people hope and we have to think peopla hope and we have to think about asking people hope and we have to think about asking people to observe the mles about asking people to observe the rules and it’s important we do that, mles and it’s important we do that, but we rules and it’s important we do that, but we have to think about those who have been on their own for a long time, those that are vulnerable, the mental health pressures we see. If we ran mental health pressures we see. If we can find a way to give people a we ran find a way to give people a little bit we can find a way to give people a little bit of hope that they can little bit of hope that they ran have little bit of hope that they can have some kind of family time, I have some kind offamily time, I would have some kind of family time, I would ask people that they follow would ask peopla that they follow exactly the would ask people that they follow exactly the regulations put in place. I exactly the regulations put in place. lam exactly the regulations put in place. I am like rows, we have a big place. lam like rows, we have a big family and I’ve place. I am like rows, we have a big family and I’ve not seen my granddaughter except for once this year and we have to make sacrifices. Life is on hold and we have to find a way to get through this safely without increasing the risk of an increase in the infection as we come through the winter period. In our audience, Tom. There are people who aren’t obeying the rules, they are aren’t obeying the mles, they are absolutely a aren’t obeying the rules, they are absolutely a disgrace to the nation. I don’t want to be thanked. You shouldn’t be thanking anyone. The peopla who shouldn’t be thanking anyone. The people who are obeying the rules, we people who are obeying the mles, we know people who are obeying the rules, we know what we are doing, but it’s the peopla who are know what we are doing, but it’s the people who are not obeying the rules peopla who are not obeying the mles are people who are not obeying the mles are the people who are not obeying the rules are the problem and as you are sitting there, all two metres apart, you ran see it is sitting there, all two metres apart, you can see it is possible to obey you ran see it is possibla to obey the mles you can see it is possible to obey the rules and have a conversation the mles and have a conversation and have the rules and have a conversation and have some sort of social gathering. And that is the same for everybody else. You’ve just got to obey the rules. It’s not complicated. Dave? All obey the rules. It’s not complicated. Dave? Alll obey the rules. It’s not complicated. Dave? All I would say is that we should stay at home as much as we can and I have family all much as we ran and I have family all around the much as we can and I have family all around the country who I can’t see, but the one thing is that through the last ten months we have been told we are being guided by the science but that doesn’t seem to be the rase in science but that doesn’t seem to be the case in all science but that doesn’t seem to be the case in alljudgments we are the use in all judgments we are making. I’m the case in alljudgments we are making. I’mjust wondering the case in alljudgments we are making. I’m just wondering at what point in the next few months before the vaccine comes out that we will be guided by the science all the time. Marina? It sounds to me like there will be some loosening of the restrictions around Christmas because of Christmas, and I restrictions around Christmas because of Christmas, and Ijust hope that the people who make up the mles will hope that the people who make up the rules will think about such things mles will think about such things as rules will think about such things as definitions of essential versus nonessential in the context of Christmas. For example, I nonessential in the context of Christmas. For example, Ican nonessential in the context of Christmas. For example, I can go to Christmas. For example, I ran go to my [oral Christmas. For example, I can go to my local supermarket and buy Christmas gifts and toys but my [oral toy Christmas gifts and toys but my local toy shop is closed and that is [oral toy shop is closed and that is a time local toy shop is closed and that is a time that is so critical to them and there are so many examples of that. I and there are so many examples of that. Ijust hope that people are a that. Ijust hope that peopla are a bit more that. Ijust hope that people are a bit more sensible about their definition of these rules. Fraser, definition of these mles. Fraser, the question definition of these rules. Fraser, the question is, should the government allow people to meet up over Christmas if people are going over Christmas if peopla are going to break over Christmas if people are going to break the rules anyway? It’s to break the mles anyway? It’s funny, the to break the rules anyway? It’s funny, the government should be trusting people a bit more. I don’t believe that people behaved recklessly and I think the public have been incredibly restrained for all of this year, and I think the “Y all of this year, and I think the way the government is framing it is a bit strange, saying you will have five days where it is a free for all and you ran see five days where it is a free for all and you can see who you want but and you ran see who you want but after that and you can see who you want but after that the shutters will come down. The government isn’t suggesting that, there is speculation they may and James is speculation they may and james is not told speculation they may and James is not told us what will happen and that’s a bit frustrating but I see the position. But the government hasn’t told us that. That is speculation. This is the speculation that the five days we will be released, to use the words the health advisers are using, released for five days and then 25 days of lockdown to compensate which is what we heard yesterday. It doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense to me, because if they phrase it that way, it’s almost an encouragement for people to go out and travel while peopla to go out and travel whila they ran and people to go out and travel while they can and in that way you might they ran and in that way you might end up being they can and in that way you might end up being counter—productive end up being counter-productive where end up being counter—productive where people are travelling when where peopla are travelling when they might where people are travelling when they might have stayed at home and thought that this is the Christmas where they won’t see my family, so I will see them at Easter or in Febmary, will see them at Easter or in February, and if the government were Febmary, and if the government were to give people a February, and if the government were to give people a bit more discretion, it all depends, for example, how bad the viruses at your example, how bad the vimses at your level. If you example, how bad the viruses at your level. If you leave in a place where it is bad for Covid, you wouldn’t want to go to a place that didn’t have much, but if you are in one of the parts of the country where there is not much Covid and you want to visit a relative there, that’s different. I think people can be different. I think peopla ran be tmsted different. I think people can be trusted to make their own judgments tmsted to make their own judgments here. The trusted to make their own judgments here. The history of this year has shown it and it is pretty strange to think that the government is sitting there working out which days of the year we should be allowed to see our family or not. I’m sure there is a more common—sense way of doing this. more common-sense way of doing this. The Americans, more common—sense way of doing this. The Americans, for example, have been advised not to see each other for Thanksgiving. That’s quite a big deal, it’s a big festival over there, but when Canada had the same thing, the virus did spike in Canada, so you can see that there Canada, so you ran see that there are pretty good Canada, so you can see that there are pretty good reasons. The government wants to urge restraint and say we know you want to see your family that the virus levels are far too high in December to allow that and people would respond to that, so and peopla would respond to that, so it all and people would respond to that, so it all depends how things are looking at the end of next month, and I think people can be looked —— and I think peopla ran be looked -- tmsted to and I think people can be looked —— trusted to make responsible decisions. Five days versus 25, Emily, was something that came from Pub“: Emily, was something that came from Public Health England. What would Public Health England. what would the Public Health England. What would the Labour Party do? Would you stop the labour Party do? Would you stop peopla the labour Party do? Would you stop people seeing the Labour Party do? Would you stop people seeing each other at Christmas or allow a bit of free for all? I’m not going to say, and I am not going to say that this is easy and different people will give you different answers as to what a successful Christmas is. Somebody like me, I would say seeing my family and I would want to see that more than anything else and that would be a successful Christmas. Rose might put more religion emphasis on this on the opportunity to praise God together but other people might say as someone has already, that we need a healthy bank balance coming out of Christmas because we absolutely depend on Christmas portrayed, and frankly, teenagers might be thinking, never mind the family, it’s an opportunity for us to have a party, so lots of forustohavea party, solotsof peopla have for us to have a party, so lots of people have different expectations and even my definition of family, and even my definition offamily, who is family and even my definition of family, who is family and who is not family? There are people who don’t necessarily have family who spend time with a family but would they be allowed to spend time at Christmas with us? And if the deal is you can with us? And if the deal is you ran spend five days with us? And if the deal is you can spend five days with another family or you rannot spend five days with another family or you cannot spend five days with the family because you are not strictly family but you have to be locked down for 25 days after, you ran see locked down for 25 days after, you can see how these things are not ran see how these things are not easy. But one can see how these things are not easy. But one thing we have to be clear about is that the way we get through this is by having a pact between the people and government, and I think the British people, and I think the British peopla, actually, and I think the British people, actually, have shown for the last year that they are responsible, that they know what they have to do because they are looking after each other and they know that they are as responsible as the most irresponsible person. We are all in irresponsibla person. We are all in this irresponsible person. We are all in this together, but they need to have leadership, clear leadership from leadership, dear leadership from the leadership, clear leadership from the government with a clear plan the government with a dear plan which is the government with a clear plan which is properly articulated, that which is property articulated, that peopla know which is properly articulated, that people know what is expected of them and in that way, if we can be shown and in that way, if we ran be shown the way through, and in that way, if we can be shown the way through, then I think that peopla will the way through, then I think that people will fall into line because peopla will fall into line because in people will fall into line because in the end, British people want to in the end, British peopla want to do in the end, British people want to do the right thing. We may not have a proper Christmas this year but we sure as hell ought to have one next year and that is what we should work towards. I want to move on, but you wanted to cut in. We just need to accept that for this year, Christmas is not going to be as it has always been, and frankly, whatever happens, Christmas is not going to be cancelled because Christmas is not ancellad because Christmas is not about cancelled because Christmas is not about the pandemic, Christmas is about love, the love we show to peopla and in about love, the love we show to people and in particular to those peopla and in particular to those most people and in particular to those most vulnerable in our communities. Let’s take another question from Richard. Richard. Will Boris’s remark increase the chances of Scotland breaking away from the UK and has Devolution been a disaster question at Boris Devolution been a disaster question at BorisJohnson is reported having at Boris johnson is reported having said at BorisJohnson is reported having said that devolution had been a in Scotland. Ian, not said that devolution had been a in Scotland. Ian, nota said that devolution had been a in Scotland. Ian, not a view you might concur with, Scotland. Ian, not a view you might concurwith, but Scotland. Ian, not a view you might concur with, but has his remarks increase the chance of Scotland breaking away from the UK? What breaking away from the UK? what you’ve seen in breaking away from the UK? What you’ve seen in the course of the last few months is a consistency in the polls that has shown a majority for independence and over the piece, that has been increasing. I think what Boris Johnson that has been increasing. I think what BorisJohnson has shown by his what Boris johnson has shown by his remarks what BorisJohnson has shown by his remarks is disrespect to the people of Scotland and a disrespect for devolution and I have to say that it is someone who simply doesn’t understand modern day Scotland. Scotland has changed tremendously over the course of the last 21 years. The clarification from 10 Downing Street is that Boris years. The clarification from 10 Downing Street is that BorisJohnson Downing Street is that Boris johnson doesn’t Downing Street is that BorisJohnson doesn’t have a problem with devolution, but he has a problem with you, the SNP. He has said what he has said and tried to roll with you, the SNP. He has said what he has said and tried to rollback, he has said and tried to roll back, but the he has said and tried to rollback, but the fact is the SNP has won every election to the Scottish parliament since 2007 and are way partiament since 2007 and are way ahead in parliament since 2007 and are way ahead in the polls and there is massive public satisfaction with the “Y massive public satisfaction with the way the government and the First Minister in particular are dealing with the pandemic. I look over what we have done over the course of the last 20 years, not having tuition fees, the fact we have free personal rare, the fact fees, the fact we have free personal care, the fact we have world leading rare, the fact we have world leading climate change care, the fact we have world leading climate change legislation. There’s climate change lagislation. There’s an awful climate change legislation. There’s an awful lot to be proud of and I think that what this crisis has shown and what Brexit has shown is that there are limitations on our Parliament and increasingly people Partiament and increasingly peopla are making Parliament and increasingly people are making that Parliament and increasingly people are making thatjudgment that it is are making that judgment that it is time to are making thatjudgment that it is time to finish the journey. The real question out of this and the attitude of Boris question out of this and the attitude of BorisJohnson has shown attitude of Boris johnson has shown in the way attitude of BorisJohnson has shown in the way that he has said it does not really matter if people vote for the SNP, and of course we fought the last election on the right of Scotland to choose. This election is Scotland to choose. This elaction is going to be Scotland to choose. This election is going to be about Scotland’s right to choose and if we win that election, it has to be absolutely clear that if democracy will prevail, as we talked about democracy and other parts of the world recently, in the US, that the peopla of world recently, in the US, that the people of Scotland are the ones that peopla of Scotland are the ones that have people of Scotland are the ones that have the right to determine their own future. We desperately want to find a way back into Europe and it is right, as parliamentarians, as is right, as partiamentarians, as Democrats, is right, as parliamentarians, as Democrats, all of us should recognise the right of the people of Scotland to have their say in a referendum. Fraser, the question is, has Devolution been a disaster and will Boris Johnson’s has Devolution been a disaster and will BorisJohnson’s remarks increase the chance of Scotland becoming independent? ii It was a daft remark, especially for the lead of a party has many people the lead of a party has many peopla standing for the lead of a party has many people standing for the devolved parliament standing for the devolved partiament next year. standing for the devolved parliament next year. That said, I have some sympathy with the overall sentiment. I thought devolution would be very different to what it turned out as. I remember at the time thinking, and I’m sure Scotland has world—class I’m sure Scotland has world-class climate I’m sure Scotland has world—class climate legislation but it also has climate lagislation but it also has some climate legislation but it also has some of the worst poverty and deprivation in western Europe. Life expectancy in some parts of Glasgow is lass expectancy in some parts of Glasgow is less than it is in Rwanda, and is lass than it is in Rwanda, and it’s shocking to is less than it is in Rwanda, and it’s shocking to stop always thought hack it’s shocking to stop always thought back then that was because, if there was a Scottish Parliament, there was a Scottish Partiament, there would was a Scottish Parliament, there would be a lot more focus on inequality and poverty and a lot more intellectual resource piled into making this problem better. And that instead we have seen horrible 9’P5- that instead we have seen horrible gaps. really. that instead we have seen horrible gaps, really, between attainment between the rich and the poor in Scottish schools, Nicola Sturgeon has to be judged Scottish schools, Nicola Sturgeon has to bejudged on Scottish schools, Nicola Sturgeon has to be judged on that and it’s not getting much better. Rather than the energy going into making things better for the people of Scotland, going into talking instead about the constitution, about an independence referendum, about having another fight with Westminster. It’s pretty difficult to blame Westminster for things that are entirely in the control of the Scottish Parliament. control of the Scottish Partiament. It’s only in the control of the Scottish Parliament. It’s only in the last year we have had some responsibility for social security. We have been praised by the UN for our approach to poverty, introducing eight different measures, four of them entirely new, for example, what we have done in terms of the £10 allowance for young people, to drive them out of peopla, to drive them out of poverty. people, to drive them out of poverty, and life expectancy in Scotland has increased over the lifetime of the parliament. There lifetime of the partiament. There has lifetime of the parliament. There has been a greater increase in London, but the increase in life expectancy in Scotland has been higher than it has elsewhere in the UK, so what you are saying is a gross distortion of the truth. If you look at the number of young peopla going you look at the number of young people going to university, young peopla going to university, young peopla in people going to university, young people in Glasgow, what we have done peopla in Glasgow, what we have done with the people in Glasgow, what we have done with the attainment fund, there is an improvement in the attainment of young people coming from the most deprived areas. You mentioned university but, if you are from a deprived background in Scotland, you are almost half as likely to get into university as you are from a similar background in England. That is an absolute scandal, and that is exactly the sort of thing devolution was supposed to address, but those 9’P5 was supposed to address, but those gaps are still there. It pains me to see. see. This can’t just see. This can’tjust be a conversation between you and I am sorry about that. Devolution, under Tony Blair, was supposed to sort out the problams, Tony Blair, was supposed to sort out the problems, as he saw it, the SNP and keep Scotland together as part of the union. It’s not been a success, has it? I of the union. It’s not been a success, has it? Ithink of the union. It’s not been a success, has it? I think actually devolution was about making sure that power got closer to people so that power got closer to peopla so that that power got closer to people so that there was more accountability and better decisions were made. Yes, but politically Tony Blair was hoping that it would dampen down any fire for independence had to keep Scotland to the union. I think devolution has not gone far enough, I think we can devolve more power. I think we ran devolve more power. You have I think we can devolve more power. You have seen it from Andy Burnham, how much he wants to have more power and authority in places like Manchester. In the Highlands and islands of Scotland, they feel they are a long way from Edinburgh and they feel they are not given sufficient power over their own destiny. What was great to hear was destiny. what was great to hear was to hear peopla destiny. What was great to hear was to hear people actually talking to hear peopla actually talking about to hear people actually talking about issues in relation to Scotland, because I think too often it boils down to, you know, constantly talking about constitutional issues, when there are major problems. May I say one are major problams. May I say one thing in Nicola are major problems. May I say one thing in Nicola Sturgeon’s defence, and you never thought you would hear me say that, but when you are saying, Nicola Sturgeon, she is making all those announcements on Covid... Chemical I was pointing it out as a fact. The reason she was doing it was that, quite often, a number of these things were about school terms and university terms and, because you go back to school faster in Scotland, they needed to make decisions about what to happen with youngsters, so therefore decisions had to be made and, frankly, if they had waited for the UK Government to make the decision, in would already have started. That’s an example of devolution in action and doing things for the better. Let’s focus on people’s lives, because that is what it’s all about. We have two Mike Richards, so I have to you by your initials. Richard E. Good evening. Devolution has been a roaring success. In Windsor, we are keen on the localism agenda and we are trying to introduce a town council because believe local people should be in charge of local decisions. It’s a charge of [oral decisions. It’s a very simple charge of local decisions. It’s a very simple message. The problem I have is that I remember the devolution campaign back in 96—97, devolution campaign back in 96-97, and one devolution campaign back in 96—97, and one of the main criticisms was that it would be used by the nationalists as a vehicle for nationalists as a vehida for launching nationalists as a vehicle for launching their own independence ambitions and, 20 years on, we are seeing the opportunism of the likes of Nicole Sturgeon, who have taken of Nicola Sturgeon, who have taken advantage of the situation and are pushing an agenda which is far beyond what the devolution campaign originally intended to achieve. Heather. I wanted to know are the SNP going to push for a referendum next year or are you going to focus on re—election first? Let me get on re-elaction first? Let me get round on re-election first? Let me get round the on re—election first? Let me get round the panel for on re—election first? Let me get round the panel forJames, coming round the panel for james, coming back to round the panel forJames, coming back to the question, has devolution been a disaster? Will Boris’s remark been a disaster? will Boris’s remark increase been a disaster? Will Boris’s remark increase the chance of Scotland breaking away from the UK? When you breaking away from the UK? when you heard reports breaking away from the UK? When you heard reports of this comment from the Prime Minister, were you thinking, oh, no, what did you say that for? Boris is a big fan of devolution, I know that from discussing it with him. How can he discussing it with him. How ran he be a fan discussing it with him. How can he be a fan and think it is a disaster? They seem richly exclusive. I know this is the case because I worked this is the rase because I worked with him this is the case because I worked with him in devolved government. He is a passionate fan of devolution and he understands the weight devolved government works best is when there is that devolved administration, that devolved government has both power but also responsibility. If you don’t mind me saying, it seems a strange defence of his comment... To say that he said one thing but actually he means the opposite. So... said one thing but actually he means the opposite. 50... Santa it’s hard the opposite. So... Santa it’s hard to believe the opposite. 50... Santa it’s hard to believe both things at the same time. The Prime Minister’s experience as leader of a devolved administration, where he called for administration, where he rallad for more administration, where he called for more devolution for the city he ran as mayor but also more broadly, is evidence it is a fan of devolution. The real irony is there is only one party in Westminster who is trying to scrap devolved government for Scotland, and that’s the SNP. All the rest of us agree that devolved government is a really good model. The SNP are the ones trying to scrap devolved government. Fraser is absolutely right, Ian will debate this constitutional stuff day in, day out, because every minute we are debating that we are not debating the catastrophic budget deficit in Scotland, the collapse of educational standards in Scotland, the appalling... We don’t have a budget deficit. The appalling health outcomes, the abysmal administration of the NHS in Scotland, the sick kids hospital with problems, the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Glasgow, sill problems there, some of the most appalling drug—related deaths most appalling duly-related deaths in Europe. most appalling drug—related deaths in Europe. Some pockets of poverty which would make other parts of the world shocked. Do you think the Prime Minister but comments will increase the chance... That’s the question for the increase the chance of Scotland taking away? What I am of Scotland taking away? what I am not going to of Scotland taking away? What I am not going to do is to play into Ian’s game. I am asking you to answer the question put by the audience, will Boris answer the question put by the audience, will BorisJohnson’s audience, will Boris johnson’s remark audience, will BorisJohnson’s remark increase the chance of Scotland breaking away from the UK? I don’t think so. My point is, every minute we debate the issues Ian would like us to debate, which are these constitutional separatist issues, we are not debating the things that government are meant to be held accountable for, which is be held accountabla for, which is protection of be held accountable for, which is protection of the people, good stewardship of the economy, how they deal with health and, on all those metric, the deal with health and, on all those metrics, the SNP has been a disaster metric, the SNP has been a disaster for the metrics, the SNP has been a disaster for the Scottish people. I lived in for the Scottish peopla. I lived in Scotland, I for the Scottish people. I lived in Scotland, I love Scotland and the Scots, and the SNP government has provided a very poor political service for the Scots. To be fair, there are things you pointed out that our terribly wrong in Scotland, but if you go around England, there will be places with pockets of deprivation and all those things, schools that are having huge stmgglas schools that are having huge struggles in terms of how they educate their children in those communities, so educate their children in those communities, sol educate their children in those communities, so I am not quite sure we ran communities, so I am not quite sure we can throw that at the SNP. How communities, so I am not quite sure we can throw that at the SNP. Howl we ran throw that at the SNP. How I would like we can throw that at the SNP. Howl would like to approach this is to say, think of a family. When you say, think of a family. when you think of a say, think of a family. When you think of a family, you have your teenagers, your but in teenagers who just on the brink of adulthood, and they are desperately wanting to be independent and free and do their own thing, and I think that we are a mature democracy and we have got to find a way of enabling the family, because that’s what we are in the United Kingdom, 3 family, to United Kingdom, a family, to ﬂourish, United Kingdom, 3 family, to flourish, to fly and flourish. So I ﬂourish, to ﬂy and ﬂourish. So I hope it flourish, to fly and flourish. So I hope it doesn’t actually increase the chances of a kind of breaking away that says we are no longer family again. I actually personally love the idea of the United Kingdom. I love the idea of the one world, and I want to see people around the and I want to see peopla around the world and I want to see people around the world flourishing. We have got to world ﬂourishing. We have got to find a way world flourishing. We have got to find a way not to have political domination but enabling, respecting, in a democratic society. We have to respect that part of the family that says, actually, I want to do it in this way. I will still be part of the family, and we have got to find “75 the family, and we have got to find ways of accommodating that. Let’s take a question from Martin McMahon stop following the EHRC report stating Labour had broken the law stating labour had broken the law and jeremy stating Labour had broken the law and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in and jeremy Corbyn’s recently in Scotland, and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in Scotland, has and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in Scotland, hasjust been and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in Scotland, has just been restored and Jeremy Corbyn’s recently in Scotland, hasjust been restored in Scotland, has just been restored in the Scotland, hasjust been restored in the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or undermined? —— the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or undermined? ——Jeremy the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or undermined? —— Jeremy Corbyn’s undermined? -- jeremy Corbyn’s recent undermined? —— Jeremy Corbyn’s recent reinstatement. I was shocked by the events of the last few days. We were told, initially, we were told that Keir Starmer had made the decision to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, decision to suspend jeremy Corbyn, and it decision to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, and it turned out he hadn’t made the decision, and then it seemed the decision was made around him to reinstate, so he was talking tough but there seem to be real gaps between the rhetoric and the performance. Going into the last general election, I had friends of mine, jewish general election, I had friends of mine, Jewish friends of mine express mine, jewish friends of mine express genuine fear mine, Jewish friends of mine express genuine fear about a Labour government, and I had hoped that the change in leadership would have seen the problems of anti—Semitism, which the problams of anti-Semitism, which had the problems of anti-Semitism, which had seemingly the problems of anti—Semitism, which had seemingly crept into many, many parts of the Labour Party, dealt parts of the labour Party, dealt with, and it with, and it seems that, you know, Keir Starmer, and I have no doubt that his intentions are noble, but he is displaying weakness on this issue. He needs to make it absolutely clear that there is no place in the Labour Party or, place in the labour Party or, indeed, to place in the Labour Party or, indeed, to politics at all for anti—Semitism and he needs to act in anti-Semitism and he needs to act in accordance anti—Semitism and he needs to act in accordance with those words and, at the moment, and actions don’t align. Contemporary do you mean there should be no place in the Labour should be no place in the labour Party for should be no place in the Labour Party forJeremy Corbyn? I think the Party for jeremy Corbyn? I think the original Party forJeremy Corbyn? I think the original decision was right. I think the report was damning. I think jeremy the report was damning. I think Jeremy Corbyn’s response was jeremy Corbyn’s response was shocking, Jeremy Corbyn’s response was shocking, shockingly inappropriate. I felt very uncomfortable that there were so many members of the Labour were so many members of the labour Party who could were so many members of the Labour Party who could see exactly what the rest of us could see and yet were trying very, very hard to make him Prime Minister of the UK in December of last year and, as I say, I hope Keir Starmer at the opportunity to draw a line under it, and he has failed. draw a line under it, and he has failad. (“an I draw a line under it, and he has failed. Can I begin, as I think any failad. (“an I begin, as I think any senior failed. Can I begin, as I think any senior member of the Labour Party senior member of the labour Party ought to, with senior member of the Labour Party ought to, with something personal? when I began ought to, with something personal? When I began to first see the cancer when I began to first see the cancer of When I began to first see the cancer of anti—Semitism growing and of anti-Semitism growing and becoming of anti—Semitism growing and becoming more apparent in the Labour becoming more apparent in the labour Party, | becoming more apparent in the labour Party, Ithought becoming more apparent in the labour Party, Ithoughtl becoming more apparent in the Labour Party, I thought I was doing the right things. I was calling it out in Shadow Cabinet, I was speaking to the leadership, I was speaking out in public, I put it in a large part of my conference speech, and I thought I was doing all that I could. And then I saw the EHRC report, and I was profoundly ashamed. I was profoundly ashamed that this had happened and, even though I thought that I had done all I could in the circumstances, I dearty I could in the circumstances, I clearly should have done more. I am dearty should have done more. I am not sure clearly should have done more. I am not sure what I should, but there was due not sure what I should, but there was clue more that could have been was due more that could have been done, and I was clue more that could have been done, and I think that anybody responsible in the leadership of the labour Party responsible in the leadership of the Labour Party should have the same labour Party should have the same reaction. Labour Party should have the same reaction. When you say you are not reaction. when you say you are not sure how you reaction. When you say you are not sure how you could do more, do you mean that promoting Jeremy Corbyn as mean that promoting jeremy Corbyn as the next mean that promoting Jeremy Corbyn as the next leader of this country, you were one of those people? Let me answer the first bit and then I will answer the next bit. What I was answer the next bit. what I was saying that I answer the next bit. What I was saying that I think my feelings of contrition, and my feelings that we had to adopt everything that the EHRC was saying was absolutely the right reaction, and it was the reaction of Keir Starmer, and I was very disappointed that reaction of Keir Starmer, and I was very disappointed thatJeremy didn’t very disappointed that jeremy didn’t seem to very disappointed thatJeremy didn’t seem to have the same reaction. I am not going to make comments about disciplinary processes because, in the end, it is right the EHRC said it should be done at arms length and it should be done at arms langth and it would it should be done at arms length and it would be right for me to make direct comments in relation to that. But that is how we have got to where we are. Now, what I write to promote jeremy and to try we are. Now, what I write to promote Jeremy and to try to get him into jeremy and to try to get him into Number Jeremy and to try to get him into Number Ten? Absolutely, Jeremy and to try to get him into NumberTen? Absolutely, I Jeremy and to try to get him into Number Ten? Absolutely, Iwas because, I tell you this, I Number Ten? Absolutely, Iwas because, Itell you this, I have because, I tell you this, I have known jeremy because, Itell you this, I have known Jeremy for because, Itell you this, I have knownJeremy for a because, Itell you this, I have known Jeremy for a long time, because, Itell you this, I have knownJeremy for a long time, more known jeremy for a long time, more than 15 years. He knownJeremy for a long time, more than 15 years. He is a neighbouring constituency MP to me and I believe, if he had been Prime Minister, he would have been radical, he would have been profoundly kind and profoundly principled. He had shortcomings and one of the shortcomings, in my view, and I have said this before, that he allowed his own personal feelings, said this before, that he allowed his own personalfeelings, whereby his own personal feelings, whereby he felt his own personalfeelings, whereby he felt he was personally under attack on the issue of anti—Semitism, so he wasn’t able to anti-Semitism, so he wasn’t able to step back and anti—Semitism, so he wasn’t able to step back and take an objective view of it and make the proper decisions, and that was a profound weakness and it’s something that he knows, that’s what I think, because I told him. You know him better than anybody else in this room, so do you think he will apologise for what the EHRC called the failures of leadership in railed the failures of leadership in addressing called the failures of leadership in addressing anti—Semitism? Well, I addressing anti-Semitism? Well, I don’t addressing anti—Semitism? Well, I don’t know. I don’t think it’s right for me to speculate. I certainly hope he does, and I certainly hope he takes the opportunity to think through why we are where we are and what it is that I personally think you should do. But, you know, we need to move on. We need to own this problem, find a solution and we must problam, find a solution and we must move on. problem, find a solution and we must move on. The country needs an opposition that is ready to step into government because, frankly, we ran do into government because, frankly, we can do without this lot. That is ran do without this lot. That is absolutely can do without this lot. That is absolutely shocking. How much evidence do you need? He spent decades associating with 9/11 truth is and Holocaust deniers on the idea that this was too hard to see and that even with the evidence prevented by the report, you are still here saying you do not regret trying to install him as Prime Minister of this country. It is genuinely shocking. Jeremy Corbyn genuinely shocking. jeremy Corbyn has spent genuinely shocking. Jeremy Corbyn has spent his life fighting racism in this country. He demonstrably hasn’t. And that is what he has done. As I say, I have been not trying to score points, I have been, in my view, as honest and open as I possibly ran be in my view, as honest and open as I possibly can be on this very difficult issue, and I hope people difficult issue, and I hope peopla hear difficult issue, and I hope people hear what it is that I’m saying. Richard? I’m completely shocked and when Keir Starmer came to power, I when Keir Starmer fame to power, I thought he when Keir Starmer came to power, I thought he would be dealing with jeremy thought he would be dealing with Jeremy Corbyn better and he jeremy Corbyn better and he encouraged Jeremy Corbyn better and he encouraged me very much when I saw what he did at the beginning and he gave jeremy what he did at the beginning and he gavejeremy Corbyn what he did at the beginning and he gave Jeremy Corbyn the what he did at the beginning and he gaveJeremy Corbyn the opportunity gave jeremy Corbyn the opportunity to apologise gavejeremy Corbyn the opportunity to apologise and he gaveJeremy Corbyn the opportunity to apologise and he never did, and I just cannot believe that this man could have rose to a position of almost being a could have rose to a position of almost being 3 Prime Minister of our almost being a Prime Minister of our country, and I’m almost being 3 Prime Minister of our country, and I’m really shocked in the way of his attitude and behaviour and he can’t apologise for the things he has done. It is shocking. My father survived the Holocaust, he is 98 years old, and what he went through and everything that happened is unbelievable and I am shocked that he is back in the party- am shocked that he is back in the party. He should be nowhere near any position of any power. I am really, really upset about the way that has been dealt with and I think it should be much stronger than what has happened. I should be much stronger than what has happened. Ijust wanted to say that with anti—Semitism. And that with anti-Semitism. And everything that with anti—Semitism. And everything around it and Jeremy everything around it and jeremy Corbyn everything around it and Jeremy Corbyn being there throughout this, there are loads of other prejudices going on and it is becoming systemic. I think going forward, we need to know how to deal with these issues and leave the past where it is and make sure these things are not done going forward, so what steps are being taken to ensure incidents and actions such as this are not going on going forward? We will get round the rest of the panel if I may. will get round the rest of the panel ifI may. Fraser? will get round the rest of the panel if I may. Fraser? I have to say I think Keir Starmer has been pretty decisive over this. He has not allowed Jeremy Corbyn comeback as a allowed jeremy Corbyn comeback as a labour allowed Jeremy Corbyn comeback as a Labour MP and he does not have the labour MP and he does not have the whip restored Labour MP and he does not have the whip restored and Keir Starmer is facing pressure from his party saying they will resign if facing pressure from his party saying they will resign ifJeremy saying they will resign if jeremy Corbyn saying they will resign ifJeremy Corbyn doesn’t get the whip and he’s not moving an inch, so here’s an instance where I am no natural labour supporter but I’ve been pretty impressed at the way Keir Starmer has followed through on what he has said. He really wants to demonstrate, and needs to demonstrate, that the Labour Party demonstrate, that the labour Party is, in his demonstrate, that the Labour Party is, in his words, under new management and I’m not sure you can management and I’m not sure you ran fault him so management and I’m not sure you can fault him so far in the leadership he has shown over this. If I were james Cleverty he has shown over this. If I were James Cleverly I would be a bit james Cleverty I would be a bit nervous James Cleverly I would be a bit nervous because he is looking a bit like the young Tony Blair taking on his militant wing and showing the country that his party has changed and is ready for election. What has and is ready for election. what has happened in and is ready for election. What has happened in the Corbyn era was a calamity, but it seems like Keir Starmer realises that Andy is doing as much as you could reasonably expect him to do to move on. The EHRC published a report which, by all means, is a challenging one. And all means, is a challanging one. And what all means, is a challenging one. And what we have reduced it to since it has been published has become something between the leader and the ex leader. It has become exceptionally personalised, and I’m terribly disappointed about that. I feel personally that we all bear the shame of what this report is emphasising. We all bear the shame of it. Discrimination of any kind, whether it is anti—Semitic, in whether it is anti-Semitic, in relation whether it is anti—Semitic, in relation to black people, whether relation to black peopla, whether it’s in relation to black people, whether it’s in relation to gay people, is unacceptable in our society. And why we are staying with this being personalised, should he be in and out of the party, is Keir Starmer the big guy doing the right thing, we are missing the point. Please, let’s get back to what the recommendations are and implement the recommendations. I want my children to grow up in a society where we do not label people, discriminate against them, kneel on them, rast discriminate against them, kneel on them, cast them away. So please, them, fast them away. So please, let’s stop them, cast them away. So please, let’s stop talking about them, cast them away. So please, let’s stop talking aboutJeremy and let’s stop talking about jeremy and Keir let’s stop talking aboutJeremy and Keir Starmer. Let’s start to implement the recommendations. Please. I implement the recommendations. Please. Ifeel implement the recommendations. Please. Ifeelslightly implement the recommendations. Please. I feel slightly trepidation giving what you have said of repeating the question to Ian, but I must give you the chance to answer it, which was, in fairness, has trust been restored in the Labour trust been restored in the labour Party by Keir trust been restored in the Labour Party by Keir Starmer or has it been undermined in the reaction to Party by Keir Starmer or has it been undermined in the reaction toJeremy undermined in the reaction to jeremy Corbyn? It is a undermined in the reaction toJeremy Corbyn? It is a tragedy what has taken place and I Corbyn? It is a tragedy what has taken place and Ifeel for Emily Corbyn? It is a tragedy what has taken place and I feel for Emily and I commend her taken place and I feel for Emily and I commend herfor the things taken place and I feel for Emily and I commend her for the things she said, actually. But you raise an important issue, and I grieve, generally grieve for what has happened in public discourse in the course of the last few years. There is a rancour and bitterness that has crept in and we are all individually and collectively responsible for and collactively responsible for that. and collectively responsible for that. And to see the anti—Semitism, that. And to see the anti-Semitism, and we that. And to see the anti—Semitism, and we have all met that. And to see the anti—Semitism, and we have all metJewish organisations, members of the and we have all metJewish organisations, members of theJewish organisations, members of the jewish community organisations, members of theJewish community over the course of the last few years, and there is a real fear, real last few years, and there is a real fear, realfear last few years, and there is a real fear, realfearthat last few years, and there is a real fear, real fear that they have, and fear, realfear that they have, and that is fear, real fear that they have, and that is something we are all responsible for and we all have to accept responsibility for and it is a crying shame what has happened to the Labour Party. I observed Jeremy the labour Party. I observed jeremy at close the Labour Party. I observed Jeremy at close quarters over the course of the last few years and I don’t know why he didn’t have the ability to deal with this as he should have done but I will say as an individual and human being, he is not a bad and human being, he is nota bad man. And I and human being, he is not a bad man. And I think it’s important to state that. But he has to accept his responsibilities of not having dealt with this and to have the generosity of spirit to recognise that he has to make that full apology today. But all of us, each and every one of us, has got to make sure that those from the jewish has got to make sure that those from theJewish community has got to make sure that those from the Jewish community and has got to make sure that those from theJewish community and the Muslim the jewish community and the Muslim community, theJewish community and the Muslim community, and the wider sense of community ran community, and the wider sense of community can live here in peace and community ran live here in peace and solidarity with community can live here in peace and solidarity with all of us and I will tell you, there’s an awful lot of work we have to do to make sure we drive out hate crime in all of its “75 drive out hate crime in all of its ways throughout all parts of these islands. We got about five minutes left and I’m going to squeeze in... Really brieﬂy. left and I’m going to squeeze in... Really briefly. Just to answer, Really brieﬂy. just to answer, there Really briefly. Just to answer, there is some positivity in this which is there is an opportunity for the Labour Party to change its the labour Party to change its disciplinary the Labour Party to change its disciplinary process and not let politicians be involved and for us to set up something that could be an example of good practice, but frankly, the other political parties could learn from this and maybe all of us could develop and make sure that when we say zero tolerance, we mean zero tolerance and we can sort mean zero tolarance and we ran sort it out mean zero tolerance and we ran sort it out property mean zero tolerance and we can sort it out properly amongst ourselves. it out property amongst ourselves. Let’s squeeze it out properly amongst ourselves. Let’s squeeze in one last question as we have five minutes to go, from Caroline. Do you think it is morally justifiable to produce a drama which is partially based on truth and real life events when the subjects are unable to defend themselves about any misrepresentations? What are you referring to? Are you what are you referring to? Are you referring to the What are you referring to? Are you referring to the The Crown about the Royal family? I referring to the The Crown about the Royalfamily? I am referring to the The Crown about the Royalfamily? lam indeed. You are. Royal family? lam indeed. You are. Yes, Fraser. Royalfamily? lam indeed. You are. Yes, Fraser. Have you been watching it? Been going for several series now but what is your view on what Caroline asked? I am midway through the fourth series and you see what has happened this time in that they are ﬂipping has happened this time in that they are flipping the characters as they are ﬂipping the characters as they started are flipping the characters as they started off being sympathetic and you like them all in the first three series and now they all seem mean, snobbish, hard—hearted, but series and now they all seem mean, snobbish, hard—hearted, butl series and now they all seem mean, snobbish, hard—hearted, but I have snobbish, hard-hearted, butl have to say you are snobbish, hard—hearted, but I have to say you are just watching some telly because it is beautifully telly because it is beautifuuy shot, telly because it is beautifully shot, mesmerising, and you can’t wait for the next episode and I don’t really see it as a documentary. I do feel a wee bit sorry for the Queen being betrayed, right now, -- sorry for the Queen being betrayed, right now, —— portrayed right now as right now, -- portrayed right now as being more right now, —— portrayed right now as being more hard—hearted than she is, being more hard-hearted than she is, but it is a story being more hard—hearted than she is, but it is a story that these guys are telling. They are using some of the most incredible raw material and they are telling our country’s they are telling our countrrs story, in they are telling our country’s story, in many ways, and perhaps the problem with The Crown is it is so good and so engrossing that you watch the first few series and it is like you are watching history happen in front of you and that is how realistic they make it. So I can realistic they make it. So I ran see, for that realistic they make it. So I can see, for that reason, when they start to input mean things in the mouths of the royals, you almost start to believe it actually happened, but then again, you can happened, but then again, you ran switch it happened, but then again, you can switch it off and make a cup of tea and remember it’s switch it off and make a cup of tea and remember it’sjust switch it off and make a cup of tea and remember it’s just the telly. That is the problem, that if you That is the problam, that if you want to That is the problem, that if you want to call it a problem, but it is want to all it a problam, but it is drama and want to call it a problem, but it is drama and there are fictitious elements because it is a drama, and peopla may elements because it is a drama, and people may watch and think, I will peopla may watch and think, I will go along with people may watch and think, I will go along with it but some might not recommend —— recognise the fiction recommend -- recognise the fiction from the recommend —— recognise the fiction from the fact. With my hand on my from the fact. with my hand on my heart I ran from the fact. With my hand on my heart I can tell you I’ve never seen heart I ran tell you I’ve never seen an episode of it, heart I can tell you I’ve never seen an episode of it, I’ve got the real thing, and Her Majesty are simply amazing. No intention of watching it. Ian? I have to agree that it is drama and if people enjoy watching drama and if peopla enjoy watching it, so be it. drama and if people enjoy watching it, so be it. But it is about people it, so be it. But it is about peopla who are it, so be it. But it is about people who are around now and cannot really who are around now and rannot really answer who are around now and cannot really answer back. At the end of the day it is drama and everybody should see it as that. Again, I have to say I find myself agreeing with Rose. We know the Queen and who she is. I haven’t seen it either. I am still catching up on the West Wing, and catching up on the West wing, and not got onto catching up on the West Wing, and not got onto the The Crown and peopla do not got onto the The Crown and people do have the ability to switch peopla do have the ability to switch it off on people do have the ability to switch it off on those making television programmes when people are still programmes when peopla are still with us programmes when people are still with us when they have to be respectful, but it is television and respectful, but it is telavision and it is respectful, but it is television and it is drama and should be seen for what it is, exactly that. It is entertainment. Do you feel like that, james? entertainment. Do you feel like that, James? If it was you featuring that, james? If it was you featuring in a that, James? If it was you featuring in a drama? There was a drama made about me, and if someone was foolish enough to make one about me and expect anyone to watch it, that’s a different thing but I think Rose is spot on and she’s in the wonderful position where she gets the real thing, so why make do with the synthetic when you have the full Monty, as it were customer you are in a drama, James, it’s the UK Government. Don’t give up the day job, Ian. I have Government. Don’t give up the day job, Ian. I haveto Government. Don’t give up the day job, Ian. I have to admit that this socialist has watched every single one of the The Crown. Is it morally justifiabla to one of the The Crown. Is it morally justifiable to produce the drama? They can’t defence themselves. I think the first three series were much more of a comfortable watch than the last one which was full of anguish and the most terrible things happen. We know, objectively speaking, the most terrible things have happened recently in the middle of Charles and Diana’s marriage and the anguish that the couple had, but of course the problem is the poor boys, William and Harry and this is a drama about their parents, and actually, we perhaps should be thinking about that. And maybe thinking about that. And maybe not the, not he, thinking about that. And maybe not the, not be, appreciate it as a drama, but these are real people who drama, but these are real peopla who are alive drama, but these are real people who are alive and have suffered as a result of the break—up of their result of the break-up of their parents result of the break—up of their parents marriage being done so publicly. But that’s not enough to stop you watching it? But I have watched it. So there we are. Our hour is up and it’s not something we often get to talk about, dramas about the Royal family is the questions came in about that. Our questions fame in about that. Our time is up and questions came in about that. Our time is up and tonight I’ll questions came appropriately enough questions fame appropriately enough from questions came appropriately enough from Windsor and next week we will be joined by an audience in from Windsor and next week we will bejoined by an audience in Swansea be joined by an audience in Swansea and after bejoined by an audience in Swansea and after that, Bath, so if you want to be part of the question Time audience be part —— go to the audience be part -- go to the website audience be part —— go to the website and follow the instructions website and follow the instmctions and we website and follow the instructions and we would love to hear what you have to say. Adrian Charles is coming up on Radio five Live, and you ran see how coming up on Radio five Live, and you can see how to get in touch and you ran see how to get in touch and put your view on you can see how to get in touch and put your view on that programme as well, but for now, thank you very much to the panel for coming in. Fraser, thank you for much to the panel for coming in. Fraser, thank you forjoining us Fraser, thank you for joining us down the Fraser, thank you forjoining us down the line and to the audience in Windsor, thank you for your contributions and thank you at home for watching. Goodbye.