 Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Chris Philp, entrepreneur turned politician, elected as an MP in 2015 and now the eluted as an MP in 2015 and now the justice elected as an MP in 2015 and now the Justice Minister, the Mayor of Greater Manchester and former Labour Greater Manchester and former labour Health Greater Manchester and former Labour Health Secretary Andy Bermingham, who joins us from Manchester, Helle Thorning—Schmidt, former Prime Thorning-Schmidt, former Prime Minister Thorning—Schmidt, former Prime Minister of Denmark and leader of the social democrats there. She is currently on the oversight board of Facebook. Associate editor of the Daily Telegraph, specialising in Daily Telagraph, specialising in politic Daily Telegraph, specialising in politics and the Royals, Camilla politic and the Royals, Camilla Tominey, an politics and the Royals, Camilla Tominey, an award—winning playwright Tominey, an award-winning playwright and Tominey, an award—winning playwright and screenwriter, James Graham. Good and screenwriter, james Graham. Good evening and and screenwriter, James Graham. Good evening and welcome to my guests here in the studio and to Andy down the line. Tonight, we will have a mixture of live and pre—recorded mixture of live and pre-recorded questions, mixture of live and pre—recorded questions, this time from our contributors in London. I would also bring in comments and questions via social media, and you can bring in comments and questions via social media, and you canjoin in social media, and you ranjoin in the social media, and you canjoin in the conversation is always on social media. Our the conversation is always on social media. Ourfirst question is the conversation is always on social media. Our first question is from Clare Cooper. Even if some children do get back to school before the end of the summer term, their experience is more likely to be about hygiene and social distancing rather than anything of educational value. What can the panel suggest for a whole generation of schoolchildren who have now missed nearly half an academic year and face months of distrust about every social contact and the constant threat of closure again? Andy, let’s start with you for top obviously some schools are going to go back on the 1st of obviously some schools are going to go back on the 1st ofJune and some go back on the 1st of june and some are not. go back on the 1st ofJune and some are not. What’s happening where you are not. what’s happening where you are? It’s a are not. What’s happening where you are? It’s a mixed picture, Fiona. Some are going back and some have said therd Some are going back and some have said they’d rather take their time said therd rather take their time to get the said they’d rather take their time to get the right arrangements in place, but to get the right arrangements in place, butl to get the right arrangements in place, but I agree we want to get the kids back in school if we can, the kids back in school if we ran, as quickly as the kids back in school if we can, as quickly as possible, but it has to be done as safely as possible, and the key thing is that schools haven’t closed. It’s as if they haven’t dosed. It’s as if they haven’t haven’t closed. It’s as if they haven’t been doing anything, but they have been looking after children of key workers. I think teachers are feeling a bit stressed from the teacher bashing they have seen this week, so from the teacher bashing they have seen this week, sol from the teacher bashing they have seen this week, so I think we need to de—escalate this row of it. The to tie-escalate this row of it. The problem is the to de—escalate this row of it. The problem is the government dropped a date on people of the 1st of problem is the government dropped a date on people of the 1st ofJune date on peopla of the 1st of june about any date on people of the 1st ofJune about any real consultation, and I think the way to resolve this is to 55V think the way to resolve this is to say to head teachers, think the way to resolve this is to say to headteachers, in consultation with councils, try and get back by the 1st of consultation with councils, try and get back by the 1st ofJune but as get back by the 1st of june but as soon as you get back by the 1st ofJune but as soon as you feel is safe, and that feels to me to be the right resolution and where we are today. I’ve got three school—age children, I’ve got three school-age children, a year six child, I’ve got three school—age children, a year six child, a year to mark her child and a year five child, so one of them can child and a year five child, so one of them ran go child and a year five child, so one of them can go back, the one in year of them ran go back, the one in year six, and I’ve of them can go back, the one in year six, and I’ve been asked by her school if I want her to go back and I said yes, so we have half term and then I will have one of my three children back and the other two at children hack and the other two at home, which children back and the other two at home, which consequently means one of us needs to be at home with the children, so work can’t go back to normal if I had been asked if all of the children should go back, I’d have said yes. You don’t have the safety fears we heard from some teachers and some unions? Not really because I’ve been impressed so far with what schools have come up with in terms of how they are going to socially distance children and measures they are going to take. We had a massive dossier talking about washing hands and temperature checks at the door and how they are going to be separated in class, but equally, and I know there is a lack of consensus over the evidence that we have so far as to how infectious children are, it’s plausible that they are not as infectious as adults, but perhaps not proven, but there have been a number of studies, studies in Australia, in Finland, studies of a child who interacted after coming back from the French Alps and having coronavirus with hundreds of other children and didn’t pass it on. The chief scientists of the WHO have said schools should go back. We have seen schools go back in parts of Europe I did a story with the BMA this week which cited the spike in northern France, but actually the Foreign Minister there pointed out that 1.4 million children had come back, there had been 70 cases but most had been contracted outside school. Initially the BMA were supporting unions in saying that schools should not ever the Telegraph ran a piece with them yesterday where they somewhat softened their stance and said that schools should go back on june the 1st if said that schools should go back on June the 1st if it is safe to do so june the 1st if it is safe to do so so, from June the 1st if it is safe to do so so, from some of the evidence I have seen, I so, from some of the evidence I have seen, Ifeel happy so, from some of the evidence I have seen, I feel happy with my eldest go back and, if the other two were invited to go back, I’d say yes. I have sympathy with teachers but we have to consider that the infection rate before lockdown came in would rate before lockdown fame in would have rate before lockdown came in would have been higher than it was now, and arguably teachers could be more at risk going to the supermarket and into classrooms. I think measures should be taken, but I am satisfied we have got to the point, and I believe that Sage, which informed government it was the right time to 55V government it was the right time to say a phased return to school from june the 1st, I say a phased return to school from June the 1st, I understand they will june the 1st, I understand they will release June the lst, I understand they will release more of their June the ist, I understand they will release more of their evidence tomorrow first up we need to see that evidence. So far it’s not been transparent enough, which has led to transparent enough, which has lad to confusion. transparent enough, which has led to confusion. Lets talk about the Denmark experience, because Denmark was the first country in Europe to reopen its schools. Why was the reopen its schools. why was the decision reopen its schools. Why was the decision taken, and how has it worked? I think it’s hard to compare the UK with Denmark. Denmark is a much smaller country and we have a different political system, which I hope I ran different political system, which I hope I can talk a bit more about hope I ran talk a bit more about based on hope I can talk a bit more about based on much more compromise, consultation, and we could never send children back to school without deep consultation with unions and head teachers deep consultation with unions and headteachers and deep consultation with unions and head teachers and also parents, of course. headteachers and also parents, of course. But they succeeded in sending children back, and one thing I was really impressed with, and as Prime Minister I had my fair share of debates with the teaching unions, but one thing I was really impressed by was how innovative they suddenly became. They invented new ways of going to school. They had outdoor school, Copenhagen teamed up with cultural facilities all over town suddenly you saw kids having education in our national stadium, they start singing the national anthem and after that they had their class in the VIP lounge, you saw five-year-old class in the VIP lounge, you saw five—year—old kids having their five-year-old kids having their education, five—year—old kids having their education, having their classroom in the museum, the national museum of art. Kane so you think we could do that sort of thing here is to mock why not? We have empty theatres, museums and sports facilities so why not use them to give a different kind of education? What I’m singing kind of education? what I’m singing Danish kind of education? What I’m singing Danish schools, yesterday I saw a report about children getting sailing education in the sea. 50 report about children getting sailing education in the sea. So why not actually use this time to think differently about education and team up, but it ran differently about education and team up, but it can only be done by local authorities. It can’t be dictated that the and that’s another reason why I think the government needs to have much more consultation with the four nations of this country, with [oral four nations of this country, with local authorities, with cities, to [oral authorities, with cities, to make local authorities, with cities, to make sure this can happen in a make sure this ran happen in a smooth way, make sure this can happen in a smooth way, and I would really smooth way, and Iwould really advise smooth way, and I would really advise to take the heat out of this, because nothing good comes from this row which we have seen in the last week. james, row which we have seen in the last week. James, your mother works in a week. james, your mother works in a school. She week. James, your mother works in a school. She has an office manager in a primary school in Nottinghamshire, doing a lot of the things we are talking about, making these preparations. They are nervous but they are trying to adapt and be inventive. She has been ordering pedal bins for tissues for when kids sneeze. They have been measuring out how the desks might work in classrooms, but it’s important to 55V classrooms, but it’s important to say that every local authority is say that every [oral authority is totally say that every local authority is totally different and every school is totally different. There are big and small classes, there are areas of great resource and great deprivation, and I think it’s incumbent on our politicians to empower headmasters and teachers, because they know what is best for the children in their schools and I don’t necessarily see the need for uniform a standardised, nationwide roll-out. I uniform a standardised, nationwide roll—out. I think the dates and roll-out. I think the dates and times roll—out. I think the dates and times and methods need to be decided by the teachers. But I love what you said about using cultural institutions to contribute to the positive learning of children stop I think it was mentioned in the question, we have a whole generation who are set at home with these incredibly eager minds and the desire to be learning, and I think that is desire to be learning, and I think that is one thing that the theatre industry in its lockdown has been reasonably good at, and education departments have been continuing to function and to work with teachers to get actor sat at home to musicians at to inspire kids in that way. Unfortunately, we will not be able to open any time soon, and I think it’s incumbent on us to try and find as inventive and exciting “Y and find as inventive and exciting way to keep kids stimulated as possible. The 1st of way to keep kids stimulated as possible. The 1st ofJune possible. The 1st of June announcement possible. The 1st ofJune announcement has turned into a bit of a mess, hasn’t it? You heard Andy saying there was no consultation, and we were talking about trying to take the heat out of it. Now we have a situation where the 1st of take the heat out of it. Now we have a situation where the 1st ofJune, a situation where the 1st of june, at the a situation where the 1st ofJune, at the moment, there will be up to 2000 schools not opening, so this roll-out 2000 schools not opening, so this roll—out the government wanted isn’t roll-out the government wanted isn’t going to roll—out the government wanted isn’t going to happen. I think there was plenty of advance notice. The measure was announced a few weeks ago in response to scientific advice. As Camilla said, there is a load more advice and scientific evidence to be published tomorrow to look at. On the point about the constituent nations of the UK, Walas, constituent nations of the UK, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland Walas, Northern Ireland and Scotland chart Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland chart their own course, but as far as England is concerned we are following the advice we have been given strip it is really important when safe to get children back into school for exactly the reason that was mentioned in the question. I am worried there are children that are missing out on education, particularly children from disadvantaged backgrounds who are at risk of falling behind in their studies, so as soon as we safely can studies, so as soon as we safely ran I think it’s studies, so as soon as we safely can I think it’s important to get children back into the classroom. Of course, at no point are we going to take any risk with anyone’s health, children, take any risk with anyone’s health, children, teachers, parents or anyone. The advice will get published tomorrow and they will be further confirmation, I think, published tomorrow and they will be further confirmation, Ithink, next week. If it is safe to go back on june the 1st, as week. If it is safe to go back on June the 1st, as we currently june the 1st, as we currently believe June the 1st, as we currently believe it is, might encourage June the lst, as we currently believe it is, might encourage all schools to do that in a safe way to make sure children don’t fall behind. We don’t want any child to get left behind, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Do you think it would be more likely to be successful if head teachers had known about the 1st of be successful if head teachers had known about the 1st ofJune before known about the 1st of june before it was known about the 1st ofJune before it was announced to the nation at large? The union of head teachers said the first they knew about it was on the television. There are thousands of head teachers and tens of hundreds of teachers, so it’s difficult to selectively announce it to that number of people. Hang on, to that number of peopla. Hang on, that’s the to that number of people. Hang on, that’s the Department for Education, that it’s only what they can do! Are that it’s only what they ran do! Are you saying the that it’s only what they can do! Are you saying the only way to tell schools or through a press conference? If you make an announcement to 10,000 teachers, you are effectively announcing publicly, and teaching unions have been closely consulted about the science, they have been on cells where the they have been on falls where the government’s they have been on cells where the government’s scientific advisers have briefed them on that, and I would urge teaching unions their members to positively and constructively engage with schools to find safe ways of going back. As james said, to find safe ways of going back. As James said, that will be different james said, that will be different for James said, that will be different for different schools, because of their geography and classroom layouts being different, but the important thing is we make sure no child gets left behind, and I’d like to add to what child gets left behind, and I’d like to add to whatJames said that the to add to whatjames said that the idea of seeing to add to whatJames said that the idea of seeing if we can use empty idea of seeing if we ran use empty cultural idea of seeing if we can use empty cultural institutions is really interesting and that is worth exploring because, sadly, many of our great institutions like theatres and museums are not being used and, if we ran and museums are not being used and, if we can find a way of safely if we ran find a way of safely getting if we can find a way of safely getting children into them, it would be a great and enriching experience for them. I want what parents are supposed to make of this. A number of schools are embracing, happy or not, it’s difficult to say, but are planning to go ahead with the ist of planning to go ahead with the 1st of june opening, planning to go ahead with the 1st of June opening, and lots of schools june opening, and lots of schools that are June opening, and lots of schools that are not. What are parents that are not. what are parents supposed to that are not. What are parents supposed to make of it? Is it that some schools are less risk averse some schools are lass risk averse than some schools are less risk averse than others, or some are better prepared? How can parents make any prepared? How ran parents make any decent prepared? How can parents make any decent assessment? I think they are probably a bit bemused, to be honest, because it’s a row that’s been going on for the last few days and I’m not sure that helps parents. I would agree with Helle and I’m not sure that helps parents. I would agree with Helle, but head teachers in the driving seat and let them make the judgment about when it’s safe to open the school, because parents will probably look most to the head because parents will probably look most to the headteacher because parents will probably look most to the head teacher for advice about the safety of their kids. I think it should also be done in consultation with local councillors, because the fact is that circumstances will differ from one place to another in terms of the teaching staff, some of them might be self—isolating them there might be self-isolating them there might be be self—isolating them there might beissues be self—isolating them there might be issues they have to deal with. There will be physical circumstances different in every school, but don’t forget that the R rate, the reproduction number varies from one region to another. In the north, we have seen a higher R number ten in the south so you can’t blame any council for taking a cautious approach. That is what I say to the government that work in partnership with local councils and absolutely 55V with local councils and absolutely say to them, get schools open on the 1st of june if we say to them, get schools open on the 1st ofJune if we can, but we 1st ofjune if we ran, but we respect the 1st ofJune if we can, but we respect the fact that, if you think a bit longer as needed to get arrangements in place, so be it, and we will work in partnership on that. Lets get away from teacher bashing. We have seen too much of that in the last few weeks. They have been working really hard through this period, often teaching kids at home, being innovative in all of the ways you would want them to be, and I think we need to de—escalate this think we need to de-esralate this row and think we need to de—escalate this row and focus on practical steps to get kids back in school when it’s safe. Some comments on social media, Lawrence safe. Some comments on social media, lawrence says, if safe. Some comments on social media, Lawrence says, if it’s safer children to go back to school, why isn’t it safe for the House of Commons? We had a vote in Parliament Commons? We had a vote in Partiament yesterday and, Commons? We had a vote in Parliament yesterday and, from June the 2nd yesterday and, from june the 2nd onwards, yesterday and, from June the 2nd onwards, these arrangements to vote remotely are being ended and we will be going back in, because it is important that our national Parliament does its important that our national Parliament does itsjob, Parliament does its job, scrutinising what the government is scmtinising what the government is doing, scrutinising what the government is doing, properly asking questions doing, property asking questions things like doing, properly asking questions things like bill committees and delegated Legislation committees have not been sitting, so let’s get Parliament working, showing leadership and doing what we are asking everybody else to do, go to work if you safely can. And D. I work if you safely ran. And D. I think it work if you safely can. And D. I think it was a really poor decision taken by MPs this week. We are not asking schools to come fully back. We are asking them to come back on an interim basis. For Parliament to an interim basis. For Partiament to vote to an interim basis. For Parliament to vote to come back completely, I think, sets a really poor example to the country, and let’s remember Westminster was a hotbed for the spread of the virus just a few weeks ago. Sometimes in Parliament, it’s a ago. Sometimes in Partiament, it’s a use of do ago. Sometimes in Parliament, it’s a case of do as we say, not as we do, rase of do as we say, not as we do, and I don’t case of do as we say, not as we do, and I don’t think it’s acceptable. and I don’t think it’s acceptabla. It and I don’t think it’s acceptable. It doesn’t suggest to me that the premier workplace in the country are taking a safety first approach. Just taking a safety first approach. just to taking a safety first approach. Just to correct that, we will not be functioning as normal, there will be different arrangements for things like voting, so it will not be business as usual but MPs will be doing their business as usual but MPs will be doing theirjob. In the question, I think Claire Cooper. About the wellbeing of children and the sense that it will be different when they go back, they will be social distancing, and I don’t quite know how the curriculum might match up to what it might have been if we were not in this situation, but the bottom line is that children miss their friends and that social interaction and, for children that have been all right at home and are in safe and loving homes, they have been 0K and maybe they can last been 0K and maybe they ran last until been 0K and maybe they can last until September without much damage. It has happened here is that the government expected 20% attendance government expected 2096 attendance levels government expected 20% attendance levels at schools throughout knock—down they hoped that all vulnerable children and a lot of children of key workers were detained, and what happened was less than 296 detained, and what happened was less than 2% of children attended, and than 296 of children attended, and I’m quite than 2% of children attended, and I’m quite involved with a charity rallad I’m quite involved with a charity called the national association for rallad the national association for the called the national association for the children of alcoholics, and the children of alcoholic, and their the children of alcoholics, and their calls are going through the roof. I did a show with Esther roof. I did a show with Fsther Rantzen roof. I did a show with Esther Rantzen the other day and she was saying Childline had been inundated. We have to weigh up the risks. Yes, there is a risk to children perhaps of contracting Covid—19 and of contracting Covid-19 and spreading of contracting Covid—19 and spreading it to vulnerable adults, and that’s not something we want, but what is the risk to vulnerable children from moaning in homes where they may be facing abuse or other problems which greatly affect their problams which greatly affect their wellbeing problems which greatly affect their wellbeing much more than being socially distancing a classroom for from remaining in homes. That’s an important point that what is the consequence for children who can’t go to school? I knew that very well when I was CEO of Save the Children. If children don’t go to school, they forget everything they learned, the full year, so we will have children who practically lives a whole year who practically lives a whola year of who practically lives a whole year of education because they simply can’t remember what they learnt six months ago. So I am a bit worried that it will last too long and we will be handing, taking a bit of the children’s future twice. First, we take almost a year of their education and then we are also handing them a very large bill for a lockdown which has become very expensive, so these balances, but I would again say find a good balance with also the teachers and take the heat out of it. The only way this ran be heat out of it. The only way this can be solved is by being pragmatic. Clare, what is your view? I quite like the idea that Helle had about using the news creatively, the value of education will have been taken away from children and I think this is every child, it is children from reception right up to the sixth formers who are losing out on their A-levels. I formers who are losing out on their A—levels. I am grieving because of A-levels. I am grieving because of that, actually, A—levels. I am grieving because of that, actually, but also I think what I fear is that children, there will be a distrust about social contact. At this term maybe but going into the next academic year and I think the value and the trust, the way that schools where before they broke up in the middle of March, has disappeared and I feel March, has disappeared and Ifeel profoundly March, has disappeared and I feel profoundly sad and worried for the children. I am a psychologist, profoundly sad and worried for the children. lam a psychologist, I don’t work in education, but I can don’t work in education, but I ran see the don’t work in education, but I can see the psychological damage that potentially is happening to a whole generation of children. Clare, thank you very much for your question and thank you for you very much for your question and thank you forjoining us live. Let thank you for joining us live. Let us go to Alfie thank you forjoining us live. Let us go to Alfie now. He has another question. Yes. Test, track and trace sounds really, really important, but what will be in place on the ist ofJune will be missing many components including the contact tracing app. When are we likely to see the test, track and trace fully implemented? Of course it is full implementation, Of course it is full implamentation, according to Of course it is full implementation, according to the government anyway, that is critical in terms of easing the lockdown and getting children back to school. When are we going to back to school. when are we going to see test back to school. When are we going to see test track and trace fully implement it, not see test track and trace fully implement it, notjust the beginnings of it, but fully implemented? We have seen the new aPP implemented? We have seen the new app being tested on the Isle of Wight app being tested on the Isle of Night and app being tested on the Isle of Wight and we have learned from that Night and we have learned from that experience Wight and we have learned from that experience and one of the things we have learned is that we can effectively deploy test track and trace with the manual tracers. We have recruited 2A,000 of those have recruited 24,000 of those already and have recruited 2A,000 of those already and we will be up to the full complement of 25,000 by the lst full complement of 25,000 by the 1st of june and the full complement of 25,000 by the 1st ofJune and the service full complement of 25,000 by the lst ofJune and the service will be of june and the service will be fully ofJune and the service will be fully operational on the lst of ofJune and the service will be fully operational on the lst ofJune fully operational on the 1st of june and able fully operational on the 1st ofJune and able to track and trace 10,000 peopla a day, and able to track and trace 10,000 people a day, that is four times peopla a day, that is four times more roughly people a day, that is four times more roughly than the number of rases we more roughly than the number of cases we are finding each day from the 1st of june cases we are finding each day from the 1st ofJune onwards. We cases we are finding each day from the ist ofJune onwards. We think the 1st of june onwards. We think the app will the 1st ofJune onwards. We think the app will be ready to deploy a few weeks after that but they are complimentary and the system will work comprehensively from the 1st of june which is work comprehensively from the 1st of June which is one of the government june which is one of the government because my June which is one of the government because my critical test and it will help us learn more about the way the disease spreads, it will help its stop spreading any further and it is an important step forward in the way we are dealing with this disease. It is good news. There have been a number of deadlines that have sUpped number of deadlines that have slipped but you sound very confident and possibly rightly so. Very confident that on the 1st of and possibly rightly so. Very confident that on the 1st ofJune it confident that on the 1st of june it is going to hit confident that on the ist ofJune it is going to hit the ground running. is going to hit the ground mnning. South is going to hit the ground running. South Korea is cited as a great example of contact tracing and they had a ﬂare-up example of contact tracing and they had a flare—up in a nightclub at the had a ﬂare-up in a nightclub at the beginning of had a flare—up in a nightclub at the beginning of the month and they traced 65,000 people defied 170 new infections and each one was quarantined. Is that the kind of level of contact tracing the government will be able to do from the 1st of government will be able to do from the lst ofJune? The capacity will the 1st of june? The capacity will be 10,000 the 1st ofJune? The capacity will be 10,000 traces every day and the Prime Minister in the House of Commons on Wednesday was absolutely rategoric that Commons on Wednesday was absolutely categoric that we are ready to go on rategoric that we are ready to go on the 1st of june categoric that we are ready to go on the 1st ofJune and we need 25,000 the 1st of june and we need 25,000 people to do it, the 1st ofJune and we need 25,000 people to do it, 2A,000 of those peopla to do it, 24,000 of those have people to do it, 2A,000 of those have been recruited already and we will get to 25,000 by the lst of will get to 25,000 by the 1st of june and we will get to 25,000 by the lst of June and we will get there. Even if june and we will get there. Even if we do not June and we will get there. Even if we do not have the app? It seems to be having a teething problems. It be having a teething problams. It has be having a teething problems. It has been tested in the Isle of Wight. Having the app is not critical for this? Wight. Having the app is not criticalforthis? It Wight. Having the app is not critical for this? It sounded Wight. Having the app is not criticalfor this? It sounded like critical for this? It sounded like it was criticalfor this? It sounded like it was the next big thing. The experience in the Isle of Wight shows you can do effective contact tracing without it but it is obviously helpful and adds to it and we will get it in a few weeks. At the same time there are other innovations happening, Matt Hancock this afternoon talked about a new test been deployed today which gives you a result within 20 minutes and we have heard about advances with antibody testing as well and the science is really beginning to catch “P science is really beginning to catch up with this disease and for me, the science is what really gives me hope for the future. Hope that we can for the future. Hope that we ran move beyond for the future. Hope that we can move beyond the strange circumstances of the last few weeks and return to something of a normal life as the months go by. Helle, we life as the months go by. Hello, we look at life as the months go by. Helle, we look at the example of Denmark which has blazed a trail in return to normality, either you had no doubts at that point, possibly one, where is the UK started after 350 deaths. Your lockdown only lasted one month and you have now eased it. In terms of test, track and trace, how important was that in terms of Denmark been able to cope? It is very hard and it would be difficult to find someone who thought it was a good idea to wait a good week in the UK to lock down. The lockdown Sibley fame UK to lock down. The lockdown Sibley came too light in this country and I think it caused a lot of damage. It was 335 days in the UK or was it zero or one day? They realised it was a big deal and they locked down and they did that a good week before the UK and there is no doubt the UK should have done the same. The other thing and looking at Germany which has a stellar example, they started their testing in their tracing and their quarantine much earlier and their quarantine much eartier and that their quarantine much earlier and that means that even though they locked down at more or less the same locked down at more or lass the same time as locked down at more or less the same time as the UK, they were at a different place in their curve and that basically meant that they have come out of this much better than the UK and I am not sitting here criticising the government, that is not why I am here but I think we have to learn from these things and be completely honest but of course the UK lockdown came too late and if the tracing had been up and running the tracing had been up and mnning much before, the tracing had been up and running much before, I think the country could have opened much before. Also in Denmark we had a much softer lockdown, and now we are starting the tracking and tracing and quarantining as well and the next question we have to find out is how we are going to quarantine these people. How this is actually going peopla. How this is actually going to happen, a people. How this is actually going to happen, a little idea from our own country, they are offering to use some of the hotels that have no guests to help people isolate. At guests to help peopla isolate. At the guests to help people isolate. At the cost of the government. They could be isolated in hotels. There have to be could be isolated in hotels. There have to he plans, pragmatic plans that ran have to he plans, pragmatic plans that can be rolled out and it has to that ran be rolled out and it has to be ramped up that can be rolled out and it has to be ramped up pretty fast and I have no doubt, if it was ramped up eartier, the no doubt, if it was ramped up earlier, the UK would have been eartier, the UK would have been safe. Do you earlier, the UK would have been safe. Do you agree with any of that? Lockdown too late? Testing should have been started earlier? It is have been started eartier? It is very hard to have been started earlier? It is very hard to compare countries because demographics are different, Denmark is a relatively small country, we have the biggest city in Europe, London. The UK still has the highest number of excess deaths at its peak of any country in Europe, according to a study from Oxford University. By any margin, we are the worst or second or third worst, there probably are not many countries looking at the UK saying that is the way to do it, I would tentatively suggest. It is difficult to make those comparisons when you have to account for demographics, have to account for demographic, age of the have to account for demographics, age of the population, pre—existing age of the population, pre-existing health age of the population, pre—existing health conditions, a city like London, all of those things are different in different countries, London is unique within Europe and Manchester as well. Helle said the lockdown was too late, do you accept that? The government advisor, Sage gave dear that? The government advisor, Sage gave clear legal, health and scientific advice and the government followed that advice. That was the right thing to do. James. Of course right thing to do. james. Of course I agree it is vital right thing to do. James. Of course I agree it is vital that it rolls out as soon as possible, not I agree it is vital that it rolls out as soon as possible, notjust out as soon as possible, not just because out as soon as possible, notjust because of our safety but also because people need that sense of confidence so that they can begin confidence so that they ran begin opening up confidence so that they can begin opening up the economy, the most vulnerable sectors of the economy require people to be physically require peopla to be physically dose require people to be physically close to one another, whether that dose to one another, whether that is close to one another, whether that is restaurants, bars, arts and entertainment, there will be a huge benefit to a test that can give an benefit to a test that ran give an answer in benefit to a test that can give an answer in 20 minutes for the likes of film and television production, of film and telavision production, it is not of film and television production, it is not the most important thing in the world, but it is a vital sector and it has got lots of people sector and it has got lots of peopla through the sector and it has got lots of people through the lockdown and people are through the lockdown and peopla are going to start through the lockdown and people are going to start to see the autumn schedules clearing themselves of British dramas. That would be incredible to have confidence that you could get actors and crew on a set, actors need to kiss, hug, fight, unless you want terrible dramas, so this stuff doesn’t matter, it is not the priority, but I think confidence that people can I think confidence that peopla ran work I think confidence that people ran work safely I think confidence that people can work safely and that tourists and peopla are work safely and that tourists and people are returning to city and peopla are returning to city and town people are returning to city and town centres can eat and drink and town centres ran eat and drink and reinvest in town centres can eat and drink and reinvest in the economy and that is vital. It should be pointed out that the lockdown did come in time for the peak. So, the lockdown did come in time for the peak. 50, there is an argument the peak. So, there is an argument to say that if we the peak. 50, there is an argument to say that if we had locked down eartier to say that if we had locked down earlier whether people would have eartier whether peopla would have been earlier whether people would have been psychologically ready and obeyed it and if you see the lockdown coming in on March the 23rd, it was about ten days later that you see that spike. The peak follows the lockdown. Of course it does. The peak does follow the lockdown but there was an argument at the time that it was only the week before and rightly or wrongly, and decisions will now be made about future events, but only the week before there were thousands at Cheltenham. Every step of the way the government has had to look at the psychology of the public on it and I spoke to a Tory MP this week who likened the confusion over timing and everything seeming back to front two that Morecambe and to front two that Morerambe and white to front two that Morecambe and white sketch with Andre Previn where he says, you’re not playing all of the right notes and Eric Morecambe the right notes and Eric Morerambe 5575 the right notes and Eric Morerambe says I am, but the right notes and Eric Morecambe says I am, butjust not necessarily says I am, but just not necessarily in the right says I am, butjust not necessarily in the right order and I think from the public perspective is they have asked themselves why are you doing this now, the quarantine thing, lots of peopla are this now, the quarantine thing, lots of people are saying, you are quarantining flights now... Not yet quarantining ﬂights now... Not yet but they are quarantining flights now... Not yet but they are talking about it. Why but they are talking about it. why didn’t you do but they are talking about it. Why didn’t you do them at the beginning of the crisis? The messaging around the Prime Minister addressing the pub“: the Prime Minister addressing the public about the loosening of the restrictions before actually releasing the paperwork describing how people should go back to work it seemed to be the wrong way around. The test, track and trace, it is great that we have this technology but that did add that defy three years ago the problems that would be faced by this country in the event of a global pandemic and people are of a global pandemic and peopla are asking of a global pandemic and people are asking themselves why has the timing come so late? Why is it that countries like South Korea were on top of this at the beginning of the pandemic hitting their nation, whereas we only seem to be getting to grips with some of that technological response at the end of it? One of the reasons why quarantine will come in at the end of the pandemic rather than the middle is because when the number of rases in middle is because when the number of cases in circulation in the population are so much larger than those being brought in by air passengers, there is no point in having a quarantine, they represented less than 0.5% of the caseload. Now that the caseload is going down domestically and there is prospect that air travel will go up, it becomes relatively more important and it measures like quarantine become significant. There were so many things that people said would many things that peopla said would go wrong many things that people said would go wrong that have been handled very well. About eight weeks ago, people said we would run out of ventilators said we would mn out of ventilators and now said we would run out of ventilators and now we have 13000 and never more than half of them have been in use. People said we might run out of intensive care beds, we have nearly intensive rare beds, we have nearty doubled intensive care beds, we have nearly doubled the number of beds at no more than half of those have ever been in use by coronavirus patients. All of those aspects of the response, which include the relationship to the timing, have worked in this country very well and I think we can all collectively take I think we ran all collactively take some pride in I think we can all collectively take some pride in the way that as a nation we have come together, we have worked together on the lockdown, it has been difficult, difficult for families, lockdown, it has been difficult, difficult forfamilies, children, difficult for families, children, peopla at difficult forfamilies, children, people at work, the art sector, peopla at work, the art sector, older peopla, people at work, the art sector, older people, tough for all of us older peopla, tough for all of us but we older people, tough for all of us but we have worked together, we have been disciplined and thankfully now been disciplined and thankfuuy now we are been disciplined and thankfully now we are moving into a slightly happier days ahead and I think we ran take happier days ahead and I think we can take collective national pride ran take collactive national pride in the way can take collective national pride in the way we have worked together on that. I’v e I’ve tried to give the government the benefit of the doubt and I understand how difficult the challenge is that they are dealing with, and I have a lot of sympathy with that, but they seem to me to be repeating the same mistakes throughout this. Is that sometimes the rhetoric is running ahead of the the rhetoric is mnning ahead of the reality. We saw the rhetoric is running ahead of the reality. We saw that on testing, we saw it on PPE and I think we are now seeing it again with this. From what I know in Greater Manchester, there will not be a world beating I know in Greater Manchester, there will not be a world heating system in place by the lst of will not be a world heating system in place by the lst ofJune, will not be a world heating system in place by the 1st ofJune, as the in place by the 1st of june, as the Prime in place by the 1st ofJune, as the Prime Minister seems to suggest yesterday. Chris is saying it will be, so what makes you say that? They just appointed the chief executive of Leeds about two weeks ago to try and integrate the local system with and integrate the [oral system with the and integrate the local system with the national system, and he is working through that at the moment and it’s complicated. For what I know, it will be beginning by then but it will nowhere near be in place, and I but it will nowhere near be in place, and Ifeel that that 1st but it will nowhere near be in place, and I feel that that 1st of june date is place, and I feel that that 1st of June date is going back to that conversation we were saying about schools, and really schools should only be opening when this is properly only be opening when this is property in only be opening when this is properly in place. The second mistake touches on this as well. There is a lot of local expertise on There is a lot of [oral expertise on these issues, There is a lot of local expertise on these issues, but throughout this the government has almost disregarded that and kind of rushed disregarded that and kind of mshed to stand disregarded that and kind of rushed to stand on its own national systems and sign contracts with private entities and trying to build something from scratch, and I think we’ve seen that here and we have some doubts about the quality of the training provided. They really should have used the local expertise should have used the [oral expertise first and should have used the local expertise first and build from there, and I just feel that the government is making problems for itself by not making problams for itself by not learning making problems for itself by not learning from some of those earlier learning from some of those eartier mistakes, learning from some of those earlier mistakes, and going on a different path. I mistakes, and going on a different path. Ithink mistakes, and going on a different path. I think we are getting there, that’s how I would describe it, but I think the government should be honest with people. It will be mid honest with peopla. It will be mid or late june honest with people. It will be mid or late June before honest with people. It will be mid or lateJune before the system is up or late june before the system is up and mnning. or lateJune before the system is up and running. Alfie, are you confident that test, track and trace will be fully embedded by the 1st of june? what will be fully embedded by the 1st of June? What prompted your question? june? what prompted your question? I’m a computer June? What prompted your question? I’m a computer science student and my experience of software engineering is that things do go wrong, they often go wrong, and we are mnning out wrong, they often go wrong, and we are running out of time. If you want are mnning out of time. If you want to launch an app are running out of time. If you want to launch an app on the same day that schools open, you are asking for the worst. It sounds like we are probably not going to get the app on the 1st of june probably not going to get the app on the 1st ofJune I am wondering if the 1st of june I am wondering if it’s a question the 1st ofJune I am wondering if it’s a question of interpretation, because you have got Alfie saying, when will test, track and trace be fully embedded, and you say absolutely on June the fully embedded, and you say absolutely onJune the 1st, and Andy absolutely on june the 1st, and Andy saying it will be absolutely onJune the lst, and Andy saying it will be getting go but fully embedded, up and running, all bells and whistles, no. Which is it, bells and whisﬂas, no. which is it, in your view? bells and whistles, no. Which is it, in your view? The 25,000 people needed to operate the system and deliver 10,000 track and traces per day will be in place by the lst of day will be in place by the 1st of june. 24,000 day will be in place by the lst of June. 2A,000 of them have been june. 24,000 of them have been recruited June. 2A,000 of them have been recruited already and are in advanced stages of training, so it will be ready to deploy on the 1st of june. The will be ready to deploy on the lst ofJune. The app will be a few weeks of june. The app will be a few weeks after that, ofJune. The app will be a few weeks after that, which will further augment the system and we will learn a lot more about coronavirus by using it, but we will be ready to go on the 1st of using it, but we will be ready to go on the 1st ofJune, and it using it, but we will be ready to go on the lst ofJune, and it will on the 1st of june, and it will really on the lst of june, and it will really help on the lst ofJune, and it will really help us understand how the disease spreads it will help us control it, identify people in control it, identify peopla in danger of control it, identify people in danger of catching it, get them quarantined and tested really quickly. Is it brings us back to the first question with schools, because you had a member of Sage, the body that advises the government, saying a well—functioning track and trace a well-functioning track and trace system a well—functioning track and trace system needs to be embedded and working well before schools can working well before schools ran reopen. working well before schools can reopen. Camilla, you are really keen for your kids to go back to school. The system will start on for your kids to go back to school. The system will start onJune the The system will start on june the 1st, track The system will start onJune the 1st, track and trace. We will see, and you are confident that it lst, track and trace. We will see, and you are confident that it will be all systems go from the get go. Do you have any concerns about it? From the perspective of all of the evidence pointing to children not being badly affected if they do catch it and not seemingly being as infectious as adults, and considering all of the measures that schools have been putting in place to make sure that children are safe, and considering the fact that they are missing out on so much of their education by being at home, all of this is about assessing risk and weighing up the different probabilities, and I think, on a probabilities, and Ithink, on a balance probabilities, and I think, on a balance of probabilities, overall, after two months at home with us trying to home educate them as well as we ran trying to home educate them as well as we can while also working, I as we ran whila also working, I think that, as we can while also working, I think that, on balance, my children are better off in school, yes. Let’s take another question, from Gerald Armin. Theatres were the first to close and will probably be the last to reopen, which could be many months. For many small independent theatres that don’t have deep pockets, it could be the end. m Do you think the government should hail Do you think the government should bail us out? I think it’s worth acknowledging upfront that, of acknowladging upfront that, of course, acknowledging upfront that, of course, against a backdrop of huge strain on the NHS and the work of carers and these big questions we are asking about when kids should go back to school, they will always remain the primary focus, and that’s right, but it’s also right that, as the country starts to get back on its feet, certain industries and companies are going to have them which can contribute as profitable which ran contribute as profitable industries, which can contribute as profitable industries, can contribute substantially to the revitalising and reopening of Britain, it’s incumbent on us to have these difficult conversations with government whereby we need to tell them the specific challenges we are going to have in order to play that active role in reactivating the economy of the you have the government here in the form of Chris, the one—man government. Do Chris, the one-man government. Do you want more Chris, the one—man government. Do you want more bailouts? The government has provided all sorts of money in terms of coronavirus money in terms of coronavims interruption money in terms of coronavirus interruption loans for business and that kind of thing. Is there a separate bailout you would request from the government for theatres? The job from the government for theatres? Thejob retention from the government for theatres? The job retention scheme was a life—saver for so many in The job retention scheme was a life—saverfor so many in my life-saver for so many in my industry, the life—saverfor so many in my industry, the majority of whom are freelancers. It wasn’t perfect and didn’t catch everybody, and I think we need to look at, but unfortunately, because joyfully the next few months, according to your plan, pubs and restaurants and manufacturers and retailers start to manufacturers and retailars start to be able manufacturers and retailers start to be able to slowly reopen, but unfortunately that will not be the use unfortunately that will not be the case with theatres and performing use with theatres and performing arts case with theatres and performing arts venues. We have tried our best but it’s now apparent there was no real viable social distancing model real viabla social distancing model to get real viable social distancing model to get audiences safely. It has to be safe for them to go back to theatres to watch plays and musicals. You’d have to be 20% for musicals. You’d have to be 2096 for them and they musicals. You’d have to be 20% for them and they need be about 80% full them and they need be about 8096 full in order them and they need be about 80% full in order to sustain themselves economically. So that’s just a problam, economically. So that’s just a problem, because the culture sectors are so profitable. It’s not like this is the 19705 and we are bailing out industries that are not profitable. I think the figure is about, for every £1 you invest in the arts, you get about £5 back, so the arts, you get about is back, so we can’t the arts, you get about £5 back, so we can’t wait to be back and doing that for you, and it’s not the case that for you, and it’s not the use that it’s an that for you, and it’s not the case that it’s an equivalence whereby arts funding costs hospital beds. We ran arts funding costs hospital beds. We ﬂ" pay arts funding costs hospital beds. We ran pay for arts funding costs hospital beds. We can pay for more hospital beds in ran pay for more hospital beds in our films, TV can pay for more hospital beds in ourfilms, TV dramas can pay for more hospital beds in our films, TV dramas and theatres, but it’s likely that that might not happen submit up to and including a year, so this time next year might be the first time would properly get be the first time would property get to reopen. I be the first time would properly get to reopen. I guess what we need to possibly, specifically, is more ﬂexibility, possibly, specifically, is more flexibility, if it’s possible, on ﬂexibility, if it’s possible, on the job flexibility, if it’s possible, on thejob retention flexibility, if it’s possible, on the job retention scheme for sectors that will have zero income for many, many months, and unfortunately we have to start asking for an investment package that will allow us to bridge this gap in the short term between not being able to open and being able to open with all guns blazing, because I think we are a bit squeezed. Sometimes I think we are squeamish about the arts argument because we think it’s an elitist thing, when in fact actually won in two people go to see a play won in two peopla go to see a play or a won in two people go to see a play or a musical every year. Think of all the success stories when it comes to British films and TV dramas. There is such a global thirst for British content and British stories, in all their wonderful modern mix. But it’s all interconnected so as a final point, even for people who don’t know to the theatre, that half of the country that doesn’t go, and that was me growing up, and all I think about every night is how to get that second half to go to the theatre, what I think people enjoy and what what I think peopla enjoy and what has what I think people enjoy and what has been a great benefit in lockdown are all the TV dramas that have entertained and provided mental health and wellbeing to a nation in lockdown for I was so privileged to be able to write and show Quiz, which was a drama about a major scandal, and I was delighted hear scandal, and Iwas delighted hear from scandal, and I was delighted hear from families watching it. It’s all connected. I come from theatre for the Phoebe Waller—Bridge, who sold the Phoebe Waller-Bridge, who sold ﬂea the Phoebe Waller—Bridge, who sold flea back to the world, comes from ﬂea back to the world, comes from theatre. flea back to the world, comes from theatre. You will start to notice a difference if we can’t be saved, and the facts are that, without a bit of help, 7096 of the facts are that, without a bit of help, 70% of these theatres will be help, 7096 of these theatres will be closed by help, 70% of these theatres will be closed by Christmas and they will not be able to reopen. Plank the Globe says it will not survive without emergency funds. Plank south of theatre management say have gone into liquidation for the plan, nothing pit in Southampton. Should there be a lifeline thrown to the arts by the government? Definitely. I think what is needed, really, in Ithink what is needed, really, in this I think what is needed, really, in this timeline, and it was almost the fussiest of the announcements that were made last week in terms of the softening of restrictions, there was a lot of stuff on sport events but not much on cultural, and it was not very easily specified, and actually I think, very easily specified, and actually Ithink, if very easily specified, and actually I think, if you want to give theatre and creative arts industry in future, you need to put a date on it so the public and say, brilliant, from September I can look forward to from September I ran look forward to going back to from September I can look forward to going back to the theatre. But how ran you put a going back to the theatre. But how can you put a date on it? You can’t ran you put a date on it? You can’t predict how the can you put a date on it? You can’t predict how the pandemic will go. But we heard about things happening in june and But we heard about things happening inJune and we heard that hairdressers may be going back into business, thank goodness, from July, business, thank goodness, from july, and we business, thank goodness, from July, and we didn’t hear anything about the theatre or other cultural events, and I think it’s important you know, gigs and concerts. I appreciate there at the end of the stale appreciate there at the end of the scale because they are mass sale because they are mass gatherings, scale because they are mass gatherings, and that is what is advised against, but if there were a window, because I know from my own and I’m sure the panellists will agree, I wouldn’t mind booking agree, Iwouldn’t mind booking somethings agree, I wouldn’t mind booking somethings into look forward to at Christmas, and that would give theatre industry a lifeline if they were able to open bookings from a certain time I appreciate the science on it is not straightforward, but I feel they have been cast adrift somewhat, and it’s no wonder that people like it’s no wonder that peopla like james and it’s no wonder that people like James and his colleagues in that james and his colleagues in that industry are James and his colleagues in that industry are in complete limbo, frankly not knowing when they can frankly not knowing when they ran get back not frankly not knowing when they can get back notjust a normal but even get back not just a normal but even the new get back notjust a normal but even the new normal everybody is talking about. james the new normal everybody is talking about. James and Camilla are about. james and Camilla are suggesting about. James and Camilla are suggesting a bailout. Andy, can the suggesting a bailout. Andy, ran the government suggesting a bailout. Andy, can the government afford it? Rishi Sunak is talking about a recession the like of which we have never known coming to the track and spending a fortune on bailing out, supporting companies and furlough schemes. Can we really and furlough schemes. (“an we really afford to and furlough schemes. Can we really afford to support theatres as well? Well, what would we lose? These organisations are the fabric of our cities, the life of our society. As a former Culture Secretary, I want to agree with Camilla, James and to agree with Camilla, james and Gerald, it is to agree with Camilla, James and Gerald, it is tremendously important. James said sometimes important. james said sometimes peopla are important. James said sometimes people are squeamish about arts peopla are squeamish about arts funding, people are squeamish about arts funding, well, we are not in Manchester. We see the benefit of investing in culture and the arts and what it does to bring people and what it does to bring peopla into the city, and what it does to bring people into the city, so we paid our arts bill in advance we have supported artists and we set up a streaming platform which has been broadcasting Greater Manchester music and talent around the world, and the money raised through it is supporting venues. So you don’t need to convince us, but I also want to say about the sporting life of the country, because there is a drive to get the Premier League back but I am worried about what is going to happen to lower league football clubs they have to play behind dubs they have to play behind closed clubs they have to play behind closed doors. Of course, there is a lot more private money in football, but I believe we need to see the Premier League setting up a football solidarity fund so that the whole of solidarity fund so that the whola of the solidarity fund so that the whole of the football pyramid can be supported through this, because it won’t just be supported through this, because it won’tjust be theatres that are won’t just be theatres that are going dark, won’tjust be theatres that are going dark, we will seat lower league football clubs going out of business one after another, and I think culture and the arts, yes, but we need to dump to step in because, in the end, we have to protect as of our economy so we can bounce back our economy so we ran bounce back more quickly our economy so we can bounce back more quickly but, when it comes to football, I think the Premier League has to step forward and protect lower league clubs and it will be crucial to keep them in business. See if they respond. Given that the lockdown was relatively short in Denmark and not particularly strict, Denmark and not particularty strict, was failing at Denmark and not particularly strict, was failing at theatres an issue? Yes, there has been a debate about culture, until Yes, there has been a debate about culture, untila Yes, there has been a debate about culture, until a cultural life plays a rola culture, until a cultural life plays a role when we are a lockdown, and I a rola when we are a lockdown, and I think are a role when we are a lockdown, and I think are appreciating culture more. There has been a lot of culture in the UK as well, and I think we all appreciate that I would agree. I think the biggest thing for theatres and all of our institutions is to know what’s going to happen, because they won’t be able to ramp up. They will probably have to run with 30% will probably have to nm with 3096 in the will probably have to run with 30% in the beginning and then they can in the beginning and then they ran ramp up in the beginning and then they can ramp up slowly into 21, but they need to know the if theatres say, in january 21, we need to know the if theatres say, in January 21, we are going to have january 21, we are going to have this show January 21, we are going to have this show on, I think many people to this show on, I think many peopla to book this show on, I think many people to book tickets because we want to get out. ﬂ I want to resist the time they like because it is an investment for the amount of money that these venues in Manchester and Andy you are right, Manchester is an extraordinary city of music and comedy and theatre and television production, the money we need to cover the shortfall until we ran properly need to cover the shortfall until we can properly reopen is almost ran property reopen is almost instantly can properly reopen is almost instantly paid back in the annual tax revenue and the VAT. In London alone, to a spring in £2 billion worth of cash every year, specifically for London theatre. just finally, specifically for London theatre. Just finally, Fiona, I want to agree just finally, Fiona, I want to agree with Camilla, Just finally, Fiona, I want to agree with Camilla, the question is what are we ending the lockdown for, it is to get kids back and reopen our businesses, but there is a huge part of British people, we are a sociable of British peopla, we are a sociabla animal of British people, we are a sociable animal and in terms of our psychological health and spirit and morale, all the key workers and we should immediately give a free ticket to immediately is such a vital part of our national life and we can’t completely contribute to that, but in order to do that, we need to be safe in the interim. We have had a couple of tweets in, Graham, how can theatres continue to Graham, how ran theatres continue to exist in the Graham, how can theatres continue to exist in the climate with tears and performances cancelled month by performances ancellad month by month, performances cancelled month by month, will we see pantomime or theatre resume this year. Nothing wrong with pantomime! If theatres are laws, our cultural voices diminished and creative voices silenced, heartbreaking art is not easy never more so than now. Chris, ran you see the easy never more so than now. Chris, can you see the government extending ran you see the government extending a lifeline can you see the government extending a lifeline to theatres? First of all, I accept everything that James all, I accept everything that james and all, I accept everything that James and Gerald are saying about the importance of the art sector. It is a huge economic contributor as James a huge economic contributor as james "TY a huge economic contributor as James very powerfully set out but it is so very powerfuuy set out but it is so much more, it very powerfully set out but it is so much more, it enriches our cultural lives, it gives entertainment and meaning and it attracts tourists. Given that, can you see the Given that, ran you see the government Given that, can you see the government extending a helping hand. In terms of what we have done already, I would strongly encourage every arts organisation to fully use all of the existing schemes. James mentioned the furlough scheme already and every organisation in the position of theatre should be using that scheme to have their staff it cannot work paid an 80% of staff it rannot work paid an 8096 of the regular staff it cannot work paid an 80% of the regular salary and the government is funding that and has extended it recently. There are significant loan schemes available and the government backed loan schemes have paid out over £20 billion and I would encourage... There is no question that the government has made myself out late to help business, but a lot of peopla are in to help business, but a lot of people are in this and cannot access peopla are in this and cannot access the furlough people are in this and cannot access the furlough scheme and people say the loans do not apply and I am asking, is there anything additional that the government can do? Just that the government ran do? just yesterday that the government can do? Just yesterday the culture Secretary announced the creation of a task force specifically to look into the issues that James and Gerald force specifically to look into the issues thatJames and Gerald are issues that james and Gerald are rising, dearty issues thatJames and Gerald are rising, clearly the art sector does rising, dearty the art sector does have a unique rising, clearly the art sector does have a unique set of circumstances and it will be the most difficult to restart for obvious reasons and this task force launched yesterday is task force hunched yesterday is designed to task force launched yesterday is designed to address exactly these issues. I hope again, as we get through the situation, as the science improves and we get things like antibody testing and if it is rolled out and there is some level of immunity, which we hope, but we cannot be certain, but we hope there will be, rannot be certain, but we hope there will be, people cannot be certain, but we hope there will be, people who have those antibodies and immunity probably can antibodies and immunity probably ran go to the antibodies and immunity probably can go to the theatre and I think science again can really help us get science again ran really help us get through this science again can really help us get through this but in the meantime that task force is here to help with exactly what with what James and exactly what with what james and Gerald exactly what with what James and Gerald are rising. I want to squeeze in another question which is pre—recorded. This question is from pre-recorded. This question is from Akash Lal. Would you rather eat a sandwich made by someone wearing a nice smile or by someone wearing a facemask? Back to the facemask, that dominated the conversation and we have a situation where the government is advising people to wear face coverings if they are in an enclosed situation indoors where they cannot easily socially distance but otherwise, no, Camilla what is your view? The jury is out on face masks. The government had to say face coverings because they did not want members of the public by up surgical masks that could be used by front line NHS and carers. Would you rather have a sandwich served to you by someone wearing a mask with micro I would rather have someone served it so much he was a Bain hygiene mles in it so much he was a Bain hygiene rules in general. I would not mind mles in general. I would not mind either way, rules in general. I would not mind either way, they could wear a face mask or choose not to, what is interesting is some of the evidence that went into Sage which came from the Royal Society and said one psychological benefit of wearing face masks in public, particularly face masks in public, particularty on transport face masks in public, particularly on transport and in supermarkets as it reminded people of the need to distance and that is important. On the balance of probability, the distance and that is important. On the balance of probability, thejury the balance of probability, the jury is out, they the balance of probability, thejury is out, they could help or they might not, but if you think it helps to stop transmission to others and if you think it helps because it puts you off getting to close on puts you off getting to dose on pub“: puts you off getting to close on public transport and elsewhere, it is probably no bad thing. It is fascinating, in Germany it is compulsory to wear a mask on public transport and while shopping, in transport and whila shopping, in Spain they transport and while shopping, in Spain they are compulsory in indoor spaces and outdoor ones if you cannot maintain distance. In rannot maintain distance. In Denmark, cannot maintain distance. In Denmark, you have not gone along with it all. It is not part of our culture, as it isn’t here either. In many ways it is something that makes peopla a little many ways it is something that makes people a little bit scared to see peopla a little bit scared to see this, but peopla a little bit scared to see this, butl people a little bit scared to see this, but I don’t know enough about the science and I don’t have a strong opinion. What I will say is strong opinion. what I will say is that I strong opinion. What I will say is that I think we have to have a deep conversation and I hope the government will start that soon, a deep conversation about what is the new normal? How are we going to live together the next year, for example, and I think we have to have new international standards of travelling, on planes, commuter trains in the morning, we have to have new standards and I would hope that the UK could also be a leader in this globally, because this is almost like after 9/11, where everything changed in terms of how we were travelling across the world and it is the same moment now and we need new standards for everything. It doesn’t have to be the same in other countries, but I think we need to understand this new normal and that is why I am hoping, I heard you before getting a little bit defensive about what the government has done and not done and I hope that we can has done and not done and I hope that we ran get has done and not done and I hope that we can get into a situation that we ran get into a situation where that we can get into a situation where we all can recognise, this is where we all ran recognise, this is a new where we all can recognise, this is a new situation, mistakes have been made and I will take responsibility as Prime Minister that we did not prepare properly for a pandemic like prepare property for a pandemic like this. We prepare properly for a pandemic like this. We had Sarge, swine flu and this. We had Sarge, swine ﬂu and all these this. We had Sarge, swine flu and all these things but we did not prepare properly and I do not think prepare property and I do not think the prepare properly and I do not think the British Government did any thing and we have to be in a mode where we breathe breathe and now is the new normal and we need to be part of doing that and talking about how we want to do that and get out of this automatic reaction where we say we did not do anything wrong and surely we cannot find a fault with anything, after all this, we also have to evaluate and create new standards together. James. Coming standards together. james. Coming back to standards together. James. Coming back to the question, would you rather be served by someone... I didn’t answer that question. You didn’t, you’re not keen on facemasks. Would you rather be said by someone wearing a face mask? I just can’t wait to be served by someone. A sandwich or a pie would go down great right now stop I wear one occasionally. I think we will get used to it. I think it would become the new normal. I think it is individual choice and I don’t know how you would legislate for it. how you would lagislate for it. Andy? how you would legislate for it. Andy? Where do you stand on the discussion about face coverings or facemasks? I think we will have to work quite hard to build confidence in the public to go back into cities and support the cultural venues and bars and restaurants as we were discussing a moment ago. If it can discussing a moment ago. If it ran help build that discussing a moment ago. If it can help build that confidence, then why not. Sometimes people can see a face not. Sometimes people ran see a face mask and not. Sometimes people can see a face mask and think it is someone being distrustful of everyone, but as distmstful of everyone, but as james said, distrustful of everyone, but as James said, it is the opposite, it james said, it is the opposite, it is quite a James said, it is the opposite, it is quite a public spirited thing to do because it is of easily reducing the risk of you giving the infection to other people. I think we should explain more about it, why it is a good thing and why people are going good thing and why peopla are going to have good thing and why people are going to have to expect to see more of it, I certainly feel in our city we need to build a clear reputation for to build a dear reputation for being a to build a clear reputation for being a safety first city to get the visitors to come back. I have been saying to the fashion industry, we are renowned for music and fashion as well, let us design the must have Manchester face mask that sells around the world, let us make something of this, let us make something positive out of it. I feel that we probably should look at what other countries are doing and encourage the use more, certainly on pub“: encourage the use more, certainly on public transport we are saying it is the right thing to do, so that there is confidence amongst the travelling pub“: is confidence amongst the travelling public and no disagreements between some people wearing masks and some some peopla wearing masks and some not. Have you some people wearing masks and some not. Have you worn one yet? If they bring any benefit at all, as I think they do, we should embrace it. Have you worn one? No, but I have not been out very much. I have been home—based. I would been out very much. I have been home—based. Iwould be been out very much. I have been home—based. I would be more than home-based. I would be more than happy to set home—based. I would be more than happy to set that example. Yeah. It is about being public spirited as james said. is about being public spirited as James said. Originally the government was suggesting that face coverings were not necessary and might actually give a false sense of confidence and then the government decided that when it came to enclosed spaces such as public transport that face coverings were advised. Seen how many people are wearing face coverings on public transport at the moment, the report seems to be pretty mixed, are you happy with the way it is going? In terms of the advice, it will evolve and change over time particularly as and change over time particularty as scientific and change over time particularly as scientific advice gets updated and I think people should wear face coverings on public transport, it is a good idea. Lots of people are a good idea. Lots of peopla are still not a good idea. Lots of people are still not doing it. I would advise them to art. There is a fair chance it will help if they have coronavirus, it will potentially coronavims, it will potentially stop it from coronavirus, it will potentially stop it from transmitting and it gives people confidence to go onto pub“: gives people confidence to go onto public transport if they see people, public transport if they see peopla, other peopla public transport if they see people, other people are being careful and other peopla are being careful and it also other people are being careful and it also serves as a kind of prompt, a reminder, that we are not in life as we need to behave different lay, wash our hands more, be careful, stay alart and wash our hands more, be careful, stay alert and the face covering serves as a reminder. On the specific question about if I was having a sandwich or being served a sandwich, I think I would want that person to be following the guidance and wearing a face mask but I think you ran still and wearing a face mask but I think you can still smile and the person you ran still smile and the person you are you can still smile and the person you are talking... You cannot see it so you are talking... You rannot see it so easily. People you are talking... You cannot see it so easily. People can smile with so easily. People ran smile with their eyes so easily. People can smile with their eyes and it is my properly you their eyes and it is my property you ran tell their eyes and it is my properly you can tell even with a face mask on. ran tell even with a face mask on. At the can tell even with a face mask on. At the moment it is a recommendation on the part of the government and in enclosed spaces, can you see it enclosed spaces, ran you see it going enclosed spaces, can you see it going further? I think we have to be guided by the scientific advice and if there is compelling evidence that it should be compulsory in the future, I it should be compulsory in the future, lam it should be compulsory in the future, I am sure the government will follow the advice but it must as always be led by the science. That applies here as much as it appﬁes That applies here as much as it applies in all the other areas we talked about this evening. Who here talked about this evening. who here has worn talked about this evening. Who here has worn a face mask or covering so far? I haven’t worn one yet but I have a friend who has made one for me and my husband. Matching masks! For when we go back on the tube and I think I would wear one. I hope that mask would match the pyjamas that you were supposed to be wearing this evening. Camilla did a poll onUne this evening. Camilla did a poll online before she came in asking what she should wear on the overwhelming vote was for pyjamas. Look! I don’t have respectable Look! I don’t have respectabla enough Look! I don’t have respectable enough pyjamas, but now the pole has happened I think I will invest in proper silk ones. Promise me that when you come back on the programme you will be in your pyjamas. The nation waits with bated breath. On that note, RR is up. Tonight our questions came from the London area and next week we are looking for questions from people living in or questions from peopla living in or near Glasgow questions from people living in or near Glasgow and then questions from people living in or near Glasgow and then following Mike from Southampton. From next week we are going to do things a little bit differently, we cannot have the normal audience here as we have done, but we are going to have a virtual audience, all the way through the programme. I am very much looking forward to it. We are looking for 12 people to join in the discussion next week via video link, you will join in discussion next week via video link, you willjoin in and be part of the programme the whole way through. To programme the whola way through. To do that, you just programme the whole way through. To do that, you just go to the Question Time website and apply in the usual “Y Time website and apply in the usual way and then we will get back to you and take it from there. If you want to and take it from there. If you want tojoin in the and take it from there. If you want to join in the discussion tonight you ran tarry to join in the discussion tonight you can carry that on with Adrian you ran carry that on with Adrian Chihs you can carry that on with Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time which is on Radio Five Live now as it always is. For now, thank you to all of you, my panel for coming in, and a thank you for joining us from Manchester. Thank you for those of you who joined us live, we are grateful for your questions and for those of you who joined in the conversation on social media as well. For this week, from Question Time, goodbye.