Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel... James Cleverly, Brexit Minister under Theresa May, chairman of the Conservative Party under Borisjohnson, new Minister for the Middle East and North Africa at the Foreign Office. Joining us down the line from Wigan, Labour’s Shadow Foreign Secretary, and a candidate in the recent contest to become party leader, Lisa Nandy. Munira Wilson, elected as an MP last December, former tax consultant who went on to work for children’s charity and for the NHS, and currently the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for health and social care. Steve Parish, a businessman and football fan who helped save Crystal Palace from financial ruin in 2010, and is now part owner and chairman of the club. And former hospital doctor turned TV writer, responsible for massive hits such as Line Of Duty and Bodyguard, and for keeping us all on the edge of our seats, Jed Mercurio. Good evening. Welcome to my guests here in the studio, and of course Lisa joining us down the line from Wigan. And to our virtual audience, thank you all for coming tonight. You are all from Plymouth. Thank you forjoining us for the programme tonight. And, of course, thank you to you at home forjoining us on the programme too, and if you want to join in the conversation on social media, @BBC Question Time is how to do it. Let see what you’ve got to say. And let’s hear ourfirst question tonight, which is from Charlie Shrimpton. What does it tell us about this government’s priorities that it was forced into a U turn by a footballer so that the poorest children in the country would be fed during the summer holidays? Obviously talking about the free school meal vouchers for children. James? m: We have had to bring about an unprecedented range of support packages for individuals, for businesses, for the self—employed businesses, for the self-employed and for businesses, for the self—employed and for families. businesses, for the self—employed and forfamilies. We businesses, for the self—employed and for families. We were not going to do this until Marcus Rashford spoke up. We had already supported families to help feed their children duﬂng families to help feed their children during the Easter break and ultimately, we are trying to get back to more normal way of working and we had hoped that we would not need to put this additional support package in place over the summer, but we do listen and the government did listen and Marcus put forward a really compelling argument and we did listen and the government decided to extend the existing scheme into the summer holidays. I think it was the right thing to do and ultimately what we are trying to do, it is we are trying to get back towards normality, because really that is what everyone wants and that is what we are working towards. Jed. is what we are working towards. jed. I think we is what we are working towards. Jed. I think we should pay tribute to Marcus Rashford for the campaign, what a great example he is and he is a great footballer as well, I am a Manchester United fan and I am biased! What I would also say, I sometimes despair of hearing things railed sometimes despair of hearing things called U—turns. I sometimes despair of hearing things called U—turns. Ithink sometimes despair of hearing things called U—turns. I think it stops rallad U-turns. Ithink it stops peopla in called U—turns. I think it stops people in positions of authority, peopla in positions of authority, from people in positions of authority, from listening and changing their minds and responding to the democratic force that got behind the campaign that Marcus started and sometimes I worry that if we use that type of language, it sometimes makes it more difficult for governments to do the right thing and I would definitely say, something that we should all welcome, the fact that the government listened and acted in the “Y government listened and acted in the way it had. Charlie, you are a way it had. Chartie, you are a teacher, way it had. Charlie, you are a teacher, what would your response? jed, if you use teacher, what would your response? Jed, if you use language like a jed, if you use language like a U-turn Jed, if you use language like a U—turn and if you do the right thing U-turn and if you do the right thing in the first U—turn and if you do the right thing in the first place, you would not need to use that language. I see every day how these vouchers make an impact and the difference of a child having a meal and coming to school is far greater than not having one at all and gives opportunity to them to be able to flourish and for that, to be able to ﬂourish and for that, there is no to be able to flourish and for that, there is no price. Steve? I would agree with jed, there is no price. Steve? I would agree withJed, I think Marcus Rashford is an example and lots of footballers have been through this crisis, or people who know the right crisis, or peopla who know the right thing to do, do crisis, or people who know the right thing to do, do the right thing and act on the right way. I also agree with jed that act on the right way. I also agree with Jed that the language act on the right way. I also agree withJed that the language of U—turns and all of this kind of U-turns and all of this kind of things that U—turns and all of this kind of things that we throw at politician mean we do not get to the right answer and it is important to get to the right answer and I am pleased we did, I the right answer and I am pleased we did, Ithink it is the the right answer and I am pleased we did, I think it is the right thing and I am pleased that Marcus showed our profession in the light I see it in everyday. Long may the government, any government we have, continue to listen to the right argument to make the right decisions. One of the things that were so compelling about Marcus Rashford was him talking about his own experience of poverty as a child, going to his friends houses when food was short in his own home. Are there other footballers that you know who have had that life experience? The vast majority of footballers come from backgrounds that would not be considered affluent. And what a lot of people afﬂuent. And what a lot of peopla don’t affluent. And what a lot of people don’t realise is what an extended network of people they look after network of peopla they look after and are network of people they look after and are responsible for, particularly many of the players particularty many of the players that particularly many of the players that come from overseas. The picture that is portrayed of footballers as being young men with too much money, it really is not fair in most of the rases it really is not fair in most of the cases that I have come into contact with. I have been incredibly proud of all the players that I know and the way they have acted through the whole crisis. Lisa, the question is whola crisis. Lisa, the question is what does whole crisis. Lisa, the question is what does it tell us about the priorities of the government that it was forced into this decision by Marcus Rashford. I agree with was forced into this decision by Marcus Rashford. I agree withJed, I Marcus Rashford. Iagree with jed, I welcome Marcus Rashford. I agree withJed, I welcome the fact that the government did a U—turn on this and I think the did a U-turn on this and I think the campaign that did a U—turn on this and I think the campaign that Marcus Rashford led campaign that Marcus Rashford lad was really campaign that Marcus Rashford led was really inspirational, but it should not take a brave young footballer to shame the government into action. The real question is how ran into action. The real question is how can we possibly only 48 hours how ran we possibly only 48 hours ago still have how can we possibly only 48 hours ago still have been debating whether or not we were going to allow some children to go starving hungry over the school holidays. Even on the day that we had that vote in the Houses of Parliament, that Labour had of Partiament, that labour had rallad of Parliament, that Labour had called and the date the government decided to U—turn, the Prime decided to U-turn, the Prime Minister decided to U—turn, the Prime Minister was at the dispatch box denying the existence of children who have been pushed into poverty since 2012 and the fact that that is projected to rise. This is a result of an approach to government that has systematically stripped support away from children over the last decade, so that now away from children over the last decade, so that new schools in my decade, so that now schools in my constituency decade, so that new schools in my constituency have to decade, so that now schools in my constituency have to employ workers, using the Pupil Premium to go to the houses of children, put money in the gas and electricity metre and deal with rats and mice because the parents simply do not have enough money to make ends meet. When parents simply do not have enough money to make ends meet. WhenJames money to make ends meet. when james 5575 money to make ends meet. when james says let’s get money to make ends meet. WhenJames says let’s get back to normal, I say let’s get back to a new normal and build a better country based on better values when we come out the other side of this. These children have been last up to now and been invisible and let us make sure that invisibla and let us make sure that when we invisible and let us make sure that when we rebuild this country, let us change that make sure that come first. Belinda, I change that make sure that come first. Belinda, Iwas change that make sure that come first. Belinda, I was watching you there nodding your head. Sorry, yes. Looking at the root of the question that Charlie asked, in terms of what that Chartie asked, in terms of what does it say that Charlie asked, in terms of what does it say about the government and like you say, it took such a high profilo like you say, it took such a high profile footballer for that to profila footballar for that to happen. profile footballer for that to happen. If we are responding to coronavirus and the millions put into this, in order to get to that new normal, how can we trust the new normal, how ran we trust the government new normal, how can we trust the government that they are going to make those decisions, without having the intervention? Munira? In 2020 in the United Kingdom no child should be going hungry and the fact that it has taken a footballer to help the government to realise that and actually change government to realise that and actually change its policy I think is shameful, frankly. It is not a new issue, holiday hunger, we know that several billion children suffer from holiday hunger normally and that is honestly exacerbated by the crisis that we face. With the crisis that we face. with the Liberal crisis that we face. With the Liberal Democrats pushing to extend this? Yes. In Wales, we have a Liberal Democrat Education Secretary and she committed to funding school meals through the summer some time ago and this is something we have been pushing for and indeed, so had the Labour Party and a number of the labour Party and a number of other the Labour Party and a number of other opposition parties. We are hugely grateful to Marcus Rashford and I am a huge fan of his and I wish we were watching him in their Euro 2020 at the moment, but we find ourselves in the circumstances and I am grateful that he has forced the government to make this change and so will many millions of children across the country. Is it a bit tricky, james, across the country. Is it a bit tricky, James, for the days running tricky, james, for the days mnning “P tricky, james, for the days mnning up to the tricky, James, for the days running up to the change of heart on this, you had Cabinet ministers saying, we are not going to change your mind, we are refunding money through local we are refunding money through [oral councils we are refunding money through local councils and then Marcus Rashford P°P5 “P councils and then Marcus Rashford pops up and that is the thing that makes the difference? It is worth remembering that this is a scheme that we had already put in place, we are talking about extending an existing scheme. It is also worth remembering that the unprecedented circumstances that we find ourselves in has meant that the government have put forward a range of support packages at a scale that we have never seen before in British politic. So, never seen before in British politics. 50, we are absolutely determined to make sure that families can put food on the table families ran put food on the table and that families can put food on the table and that is why we are supporting peopla who and that is why we are supporting people who are furloughed at the moment and we are working so hard to get through this unbelievably difficult set of circumstances. Ultimately, we are trying to balance the competing financial and social pressures and sometimes, when someone shines a pressures and sometimes, when someone shines alight pressures and sometimes, when someone shines a light on a particular issue and we look again at it and we make the decision that this is something that we can extend this is something that we ran extend and this is something that we can extend and should extend through the summer and I am grateful that Marcus did that, I and I am grateful that Marcus did that, Iam very and I am grateful that Marcus did that, I am very grateful that we listened and I’m grateful that we responded. 0K, listened and I’m grateful that we responded. OK, let’s take another question, from Debbie Norrish. Good evening everyone. Is a delay in learning of 6 months genuinely devastating to a whole generation as the chief inspector of schools has stated? That was suggested by the former head, the Chief Inspector of Schools. Jed? Devastating for a whole generation? I think the problem with sending kids back to school and the delay is something we should all be concerned about. I think the fact is that the time that children spend in school at a vulnerable age is precious time, and I think it will be very, very hard for them to catch up, so I think that definitely more should have been done in terms of the planning. I think that there has been a failure of planning to get children back into school. I think that, obviously, the pandemic arrangements have put an enormous strain on the infrastmclure is in our society, but I also think that if you look at what is required for children to go back to school, it’s not just the fact that children need to go back to school — it’s the society needs those children back into school, because of all the things that surround children being at school, not requiring childcare and so forth. And I really wish that the Government had gone about the planning in a more forthright and more detailed way. Deborah, I’m wondering, you’re asking the question and I know you’re a deputy headteacher. The way you phrase it makes me wonder if you think it isn’t actually genuinely devastating, or isn’t devastating for a generation of children? It’s been absolutely awful. This week, so I work at a secondary school in Plymouth, and we’ve had Year 105 and 125 back for the first time, and first of all it’s absolutely delightful to see them all. But it’s absolutely horrifying that we can’t provide more, and they are desperate for it. Attendance this week has been brilliant. You know, clearly home learning isn’t doing the job for them that we needed to do. We haven’t got clarity yet on what is going to happen with their exams next year and assessment, and we are desperate for further guidance about planning for September, school leavers. Our students are becoming disillusioned at not having that, I think. Marcia, you have your hand up. I’m a parent to a Year ten and I Year 12 children, and I was wondering whether any consideration is being given to the request for reducing the curriculum content, for the GCSE and A—levels next summer. Because of all the teaching they will have missed? Exactly. Munira? Well, I think everybody, whether you are a parent, teacher, a school governor, everybody is desperate to get children back to school. We know the detrimental impact it’s having on their well being as well as on their educational development, but clearly we have to do that when it is safe. And the Lib Dems have put a whole range of suggestions in place for children going back to school, so you are not in any great rush to get them back? We have put forward a plan which includes things like identifying safe spaces that could then... Having a safe space register, that would open up safe community spaces that could potentially be used as additional space for schooling, so you can then get kids back to school safely. My concern is, firstly, the test and tray system clearly My concern is, firstly, the test and trace system clearly isn’t up and running properly, and forany part of lockdown, whether that is schools or parts of the economy to be opened up, we need to be testing, tracing and isolating every single case to keep people safe. The other thing is just the lack of plan. AsJed was saying. I would have hoped there would have been a plan put forward with a range of scenarios perhaps and certainly I was talking to head teachers in my constituency on Wednesday and they said to me, we urgently need a plan so we can start to prepare for September, so we know what we are doing. But we need that now. Let’s see if we can find out what the plan is. We have James here. One thing I would like to add, a lot of parents feel they haven’t had a voice in this debate and there’s been this big blame game going on between Government and the unions, and the reason we ended up with a slight change of guidance for primary schools because there was that lack of engagement and communication between government and schools and unions to understand what was workable. 0K, what is the plan, James? I have two boys school. My eldest has just finished, and unfortunately wasn’t able to sit his A—levels. So I know the huge and understandable desire that parents, teaching professionals, the natural desire they have for certainty and clarity. This is an evolving situation. You’re going to have to wait for the announcement. ﬂ I don’t want to steal the thunder of my colleagues in education. The point is we are evolving the plan as we learn more about the nature of the vims. we learn more about the nature of the virus. We’ve got to make sure the vims. We’ve got to make sure the the virus. We’ve got to make sure the students are safe, that the teaching professionals are safe, and so this will mean we are having to adapt, and that is disconcerting, hugely disconcerting for parents. We completely understand that. But we want to make sure children don’t miss out on their education. Education is incredibly important, and it’s not Education is incredibly important, and it’s notjust about the and it’s not just about the syllabus. and it’s notjust about the syllabus. It’s also about the social interactions. So we want to make sure we interactions. 50 we want to make sure we can re—establish teaching sure we ran re-establish teaching provision in a sure we can re—establish teaching provision in a way that is safe for the students, for the staff, for the teaching professionals and of course their teaching professionals and of course theirfamilies. But isn’t teaching professionals and of course their families. But isn’t it confusing for parents and students alike when there was a plan announced? If I recall, it was that schools would go back on the 1st of june, and schools would go back on the lst of June, and Michael Gove said it schools would go back on the 1st of June, and Michael Gove said it was june, and Michael Gove said it was safe for June, and Michael Gove said it was safe for them to go back on the 1st of june, and it safe for them to go back on the 1st ofJune, and it was predicated on of june, and it was predicated on having... I hate ofJune, and it was predicated on having... I hate to use the phrase, but world beating test entry system. There has been a failure to achieve that. We need safety —— test and that. We need safety -- test and tray system. that. We need safety —— test and tray system. We need a functioning test and trace system and low levels of transmission. It’s not test and trace system and low levels of transmission. It’s notjust about of transmission. It’s not just about it being safer of transmission. It’s notjust about it being safer kids to go back to school. It has to be said for society. They travel. They interact with staff. Those staff members interact with people in their households. And possibly the disease ran be households. And possibly the disease can be transmitted to vulnerable ran be transmitted to vulnerable people. So there has been a total failure to deliver on the promises and that has caused a great deal of confusion. Well, I’m going to have to disagree with you on the point you’re making about the requirement for test and trace and are planning around that, the delivery of that. We now have a testing system which test huge numbers of people on a daily basis, numbers of peopla on a daily basis, hundreds numbers of people on a daily basis, hundreds of thousands of people, and hundreds of thousands of peopla, and that was hundreds of thousands of people, and that was driven forward. that was driven forward. Set incredibly challenging targets to incredibly challanging targets to expand incredibly challenging targets to expand that. I think we might get onto this in a moment, and that’s absolutely fine. They are just some hands up in the audience. Tony? Yes, hello. One of the things bugging me about all of this, everything comes down to the Government has to have a plan, and the Government does have to have a plan. Some of the ideas that have come through are, frankly, just incomprehensible. I was just listening today to somebody saying that the problem is we don’t have enough space. We can open hotels, we enough space. We ran open hotels, we ran put up enough space. We can open hotels, we can put up marquees, and that way we ran put up marquees, and that way we ran get more kids can put up marquees, and that way we can get more kids back into school. ran get more kids back into school. Great can get more kids back into school. Great idea. It begs the question, where are the teachers? Because you wouldn’t have enough teachers to do that, and those teachers we have got, about 40% of them don’t want to got, about 4096 of them don’t want to go back anyway. got, about 40% of them don’t want to go back anyway. Sue? We all know education is a great social leveller education is a great social laveller and a great education is a great social leveller and a great force for social mobility, and with rising inequality in the UK the fact that these children... children... The question of whether six months of school is devastating for a whole generation. Those children with no access to the internet, no computers at school, no books on the book shelves behind them, these are the children who are particularty them, these are the children who are particularly suffering from this, particularty suffering from this, and particularly suffering from this, and until we have, I’m sorry to repeat it, but until we have effective tracing in place, testing and tracing, we can’t get there. We cannot have like on the Isle of cannot have like on the Isla of Wight cannot have like on the Isla of Night 9095 cannot have like on the Isle of Wight 90% of those people who are Night 9096 of those peopla who are traced Wight 90% of those people who are traced disappearing into the ether. Deborah, you have your hand up. Coming back to James about the Coming back to james about the points and Coming back to James about the points and the vision to get students back into school, which is exactly what we all want, the implementation of some of the policies the Government have suggested haven’t necessarily turned out as planned. The school laptops, for example, in our school, the disadvantaged laptop still haven’t arrived. I know that announcement today of the National tutoring programme, in theory it sounds fabulous, but in reality have we got the capacity to implement what the Government are trying to suggest? Lisa? Well, the question was about the impact on children, and I think there is no question that this is going to have a big impact on this generation. It’s not going to have a big impact on this generation. It’s notjust about exam generation. It’s not just about exam results generation. It’s notjust about exam results and life chances, as important as that is, but health professionals are increasingly worried this is having a real impact on children’s mental health as well. So we ought to be trying to get children back to school as quickly as can safely be achieved. It is why as ran safely be achieved. It is why it has as can safely be achieved. It is why it has been so frustrating to see the Government’s response to this, entering into this blame game and refusing to work with people to refusing to work with peopla to build a refusing to work with people to build a national consensus around this. I think we could sort this out pretty quickly, actually. It is a huge effort and it takes a lot of work to get children back to school safely work to get children hack to school safely with work to get children back to school safely with the social distancing requirements, but if you think back to when we were trying to get the pub“: to when we were trying to get the public health efforts of the ground and the Government did conceive they needed to work with a wide variety of partners, the army was brought in to help construct hospitals, we had peopla being to help construct hospitals, we had people being brought back out of retirement in order to help boost the workforce, and we need a comparable effort for education. We had efforts around health, we’ve had efforts around the economy, but education has really been the poor relation. Lisa, is labour’s position, relation. Lisa, is labour’s position, sorry to interrupt, but is position, sorry to intermpt, but is Labour’s position, sorry to interrupt, but is Labour’s position slightly confusing? The Shadow Education Secretary Rebecca Long—Bailey said Secretary Rebeca Long-Bailay said only last Secretary Rebecca Long—Bailey said only last week it was welcome that the Government was rolling back from full school reopening plans before summer. It is welcome that they are not trying to force schools to reopen when it is not safe to do so, and actually this is five months ago we were calling for the Government we were falling for the Government to have we were calling for the Government to have an exit strategy from lockdown, to start working on that now, because the countries that have managed to get children back to school more quickly were planning for this several months ago. They have also done a lot more to try and get support to children in the meantime so when children do go back to school we are not dealing with this enormous attainment gap. The Government promised laptops and intranet connections months ago but we are just still not seeing them delivered around the country, we had a plan announced today that said they would be private tutoring available. I really welcome this, but once again school leader limit have been left wringing their hands saying, why haven’t you spoken to us before you announce these? We have had enough of back of the envelope plans, we need a proper national strategy and national consensus and we need the Government to reach out and work with schools in order to get our children back to school as quickly as possible. Steve, there seems to be an element of some schools planning their own furrow. Private schools saying they are going to get their own kind of apt going, that they are committed to getting all children back in school by September. Look, I would agree with Lisa on a lot of things. We don’t seem to have a strategy to exit the in any industry. You know, fortunately, in football we had the resources and the money to develop our own strategy, and we can test our own strategy, and we ran test players twice a our own strategy, and we can test players twice a week, and we have a fairty limited players twice a week, and we have a fairly limited requirement without fairty limited requirement without supporters. fairly limited requirement without supporters. This virus most likely will stay with us in disguise for the foreseeable future. We all hope for a vaccine, we hope for better interventions, but we know they are not likely to come. If the lockdown worked, which we all think it did, when we come out of lockdown infections will rise. And if we can’t track those infections and ran’t track those infections and trace can’t track those infections and trace them and quell those outbreaks, we really are in for a terrible time economically, and coming back to the original question I would say there will be limited damage done to everything if we can damage done to everything if we ran get back to as damage done to everything if we can get back to as close to normal as possibla by get back to as close to normal as possible by September. But if we don’t get back to as close to normal as possibla by don’t get back to as close to normal as possible by September or children, businesses, children’s future will be damaged for maybe 10-15 years. future will be damaged for maybe 10—15 years. So the next 2—3 months 10-15 years. So the next 2-3 months are such a 10—15 years. So the next 2—3 months are such a crucial period. It does require everybody to stop the blame game. It requires a massive, massive national effort, and a can—do national effort, and a ran-do mentality national effort, and a can—do mentality and attitude that it worries me that we seem to have lost in this country. If we don’t do that, we really are in serious problems. White might look, you probloms. white might look, you mention, problems. White might look, you mention, and you mention as well, jed, in terms of mention, and you mention as well, Jed, in terms of contact tracing and jed, in terms of contact tracing and that moving us Jed, in terms of contact tracing and that moving us forward, we have a question on that, so let’s come to Gareth jones. The current APP development is experiencing problems, if we don’t get it working does it really matter, will it make a difference to preventing a second wave? Does it really matter, Lisa Nandy? I Does it really matter, Lisa Mandy? I think it Does it really matter, Lisa Nandy? I think it does matter and I very much support the Government in trying to set this up because in the end if you get the app up and running it you get the app up and mnning it will save you get the app up and running it will save lives, but the problem was the Government was one from the outset the path they were taking was not going to work because the technology just wasn’t compatible with a lot of phones. There were other countries, like Germany and Australia, who were taking a similar path to our Government, trying to develop their own technology, realised it wouldn’t work, listen to those warnings, and actually went down a different path. As a result, Germany has just managed to launch their app yesterday and they are quite confident about how it will work. So we really have to start breaking the pattern here which is a Government that shuts people out, Government that shuts peopla out, doesn’t Government that shuts people out, doesn’t listen to advice, doesn’t seek to learn from expertise here in the UK and overseas. And then find later that they have to revisit those plans because they have unravelled very quickly. We saw it unravellad very quickly. We saw it over and unravelled very quickly. We saw it over and over again with a whole over and over again with a whola host of things. over and over again with a whole host of things. One of the real outstanding problems with all of outstanding problams with all of this at outstanding problems with all of this at the moment is you have pub“: this at the moment is you have public health directors across England saying that they still don’t get. . . England saying that they still don’t get... The GPs in local areas don’t get... The GPs in [oral areas don’t get the results of get... The GPs in local areas don’t get the results of tests because the Government set up their own private sector testing facilities around the country, so GPs simply don’t know when their patients are testing positive for Covid. Public health directors are looking closely at [oral directors are looking closely at local outbreaks and having to make decisions about managing local outbreaks, but because they are not getting that information they outbreaks, but because they are not getting that information theyjust getting that information they just simply getting that information theyjust simply don’t have the tools they need to do the job, so we need a reset here. It is right for the Government to abandon the system if it isn’t working but we need to ask ourselves, why is it so often that we end up having to unravel plans over and over again because we didn’t get them right in the first place? Steve, I didn’t get them right in the first place? Steve, Iwant didn’t get them right in the first place? Steve, I want to ask you not only what you think about this particular question, but also just tell us a little about how you’re managing at Crystal Palace, because you have a kind of app of your own there? Yes, it’s not a tracing app. On the app, it seems incredible to me so many countries are developing their own I would have thought... ..certainly if the EU has a purpose that might be one thing that they could’ve got everyone’s heads together on. We all want exactly the same app doing exactly the same thing, which seems incredible. We have a very simple app where the players and the staff fill in any symptoms, because that’s as efficient a way of catching the disease early. Sometimes there is testing where there can be a lag between the time you test and testing positive. But, you know, developing these apps is extremely complex. As somebody who had a business that developed this kind of thing, the timescales that we are trying to do it in are very, very compressed. And I’m pleased today that they’re adapting to Google and Apple technology which, you know — I would hazard a guess — they might be better at producing stuff than, you know, people in our Government. So, look, let’s hope that we can all get together. The blame game on both sides I think really does need to stop. It’s a very difficult situation. Nobody was prepared for the situation. But, you know, we can see Germany have done slightly less worse than everybody else. We’ll need to look back... They’ve done a lot better in terms of their death toll. They have done in terms of their death toll, but I think when we look back on this 10,000 deaths is too many. You know, for this to get to the extent that it did come into the amount of countries that it has, you know, the world really needs to look at it and make sure that these kind of outbreaks are jumped on way before the kind of things we are discussing now. Because we are talking now a pandemic that is broadly out of control in the world that we are trying to get on top of, and it is going to be extremely difficult. And we do need to come together, as a country, private interface, the Government, both sides of the House, and try and find a solution in the next two or three months, or we really could be in a terrible situation. Mike, you’ve had your hand up from the start. Yes, I was going to say, with Apple and Google, there’s good parts in both applications. Surely these companies could come togetherfor once, you know, because there’s a big pandemic on, and sort of resource... Put their resources together. Well, I think they are putting their resources together for the benefits of this particular app, as I understand it. Charles 7 Yes. It just seems that this is just another moment of Government bluster actually hitting reality. 50 Matt Hancock and Baroness Harding said today that they backed both horses of the Google and the android model and the NHS app, but they’ve always insisted until this point that they were only going to pursue the NHS app. So itjust seems that the Government are trying to make it seem that they’re trying to do the job possible but when it comes to reality they want to cover up and not pretend that they’ve done anything wrong. Jed? Well, I think that the app can only really be an adjunct. I think there are technological limitations in the app in terms of providing a nationwide service. And, really, it’s about having a functioning public health infrastructure that is able to deal with outbreaks locally, and unfortunately the Government has chosen to centralise and use a private company, Serco, to take the lead on this. And I think that a lot of public health officials and workers, as Lisa said, are frustrated that they are not receiving the information — they’ve kind of been shutout, whether intentionally or not, I don’t know. But they do feel that they’ve been shutout, and that it does, then, limit is in terms of our ability to do exactly what we are all asking for. As Steve said, where is that can do attitude? Can we crush this virus so that society can get back to normal and our kids can get back into school and their businesses can get up and running? And a lot of the businesses and the particular sectors that are looking to get back frankly don’t have much confidence. And what about your business? I mean, getting Line Of Duty — I see that as an unashamed fan, I have to confess — getting that back up and running? Well, it is interesting that you give that specific example because we had an outbreak during the shoot, over in Belfast, when there was the test and trace system originally, the containment phase. And we were able to deal with that, and we were able to carry on uninterrupted. Then, towards the end of the shoot that got curtailed, we had another outbreak and I was quite surprised to learn that we weren’t able to do testing and tracing, the system had been stopped. And that was the point where, really, when we looked at it, we knew that we couldn’t protect our workforce and we had to stop. And that was nine days before the lockdown. So the writing was on the well then, and I think a lot of businesses are just going to take responsibility for it themselves. I think that each TV production will organise their own testing and they will look after each other and do their best that way. And, James, obviously we had the announcement today from the Health Secretary about switching horses, I think, was the analogy Matt Hancock used. But he also said, "We backed both horses throughout" — the NHSX app and also this other app, kind of Google Apple app. What I don’t understand about that is if the Government has been backing both those things, it’s nowjettisoned one — why isn’t the other one ready? Well, I mean, these apps, we talk about... I mean, Lisa implies there was an obvious right answer. There clearly wasn’t an obvious right answer... But if you’ve been backing them both and other countries are already introducing their own apps, how come the other one isn’t ready? So the idea that there was an obvious right answer is wrong, otherwise every country in the world would have done the same thing. That’s not what happened — Germany as an example. And what Matt did was exactly the right thing to do, which is not to put all our eggs in one basket, to make sure that we were developing, you know, the in—house app as it were and the app through third parties. So how ready is this app, then? And it was tested on the Isle of Wight and the decision was made to go with the other option, and that’s the right thing to do, and it’s about learning as we go through this and making the decision. I don’t know exactly when the app will go live. Because we heard it might not be till winter. So, as I say, I don’t want to guess and speculate. I don’t know exactly when the app will go live, but obviously we will continue working with international friends and partners, we will learn from what other countries are doing, and the whole world is learning as we go, to make sure that we bring about a test and trace app that can be used to protect us all. Gareth? Yeah. Do you not think that the public are going to see this as another U—turn again, and it’s going to be even harder to get the public on board to actually use the app when it does become live? And do you worry about that, loss of public confidence? No, because, I mean... Which is critical, obviously, if it’s going to work. We use the word U—turn. I mean, I was in business before I came into politics, and if you’re going to test a couple of options, see which one progresses best, see which one works, and then invest your time and effort in the better performing one of those options, that’s not a U—turn. That’s why it was tested on the Isle of Wight... 0K. That’s why, you know, we learn from their experiences. So you have been trialling the other option on the Isle of Wight as well? Well, as... No, but the point... Oh, you haven’t? The point that Matt was saying... No, hang on, Ijust want to be clear, because now I really don’t understand. So if Matt Hancock said you were backing both options, and you are trialling the NHSX app, presumably you are trialling the other one as well, otherwise... That’s what backing both options is. No, that’s... Isn’t it? So the test of our in—house app was done on the Isle of Wight. We were keeping our options open for the use of either... So you haven’t trialled the other one? The other system is being used more widely so doing a discreet UK only trialfor that one, my understanding, and I’m willing to be corrected on this... So we haven’t tried it, but you’re relying on other countries? Because it’s being used elsewhere. Right. So it’s not necessary for us to trial both. 0K, I’ve got that clear. The reason we were trialling is to make sure that we chose the best option because each option had their advantages and disadvantages. It was not clear cut at the start of this process that this would be the better option. That’s why you test. Munira. I can’t overstate how important getting test and trace right and getting it right as quickly as possible is. Everybody who is watching this evening is desperate to try and get back to some sense of normality. Without a robust, operational test and trace system it’s impossible to be able to do that safely. We have to be able to find every case and isolate it and suppress this virus. What is very clear to me is when I had a conversation with the Deputy Chief Medical Officer on the 13th of March it was around then that we stopped routinely testing and tracing every incidence of coronavirus, and I questioned her hard, and I said, "Why are you stopping the testing? We should be testing every case." And it was down to capacity. And it had been far too late. It was some weeks after that that we suddenly saw a focus on ramping up testing. And, great, we’ve got the capacity. But, James, we haven’t had for almost a month now the figures on how many people have actually been tested, on a daily basis, and on tracing, as Lisa has said, we need to be working much more closely with local authorities. Directors of public health have been crying out to be leading this effort. They are the experts. I didn’t watch the Salisbury poisonings earlier this week, but I heard in there it showed just how pivotable the role of the Director of public health is. That is what they should be doing. That’s what they are experts in, and they should be leading those teams of contact tracers to be tracing every case. But last week I was talking to some leaders in local Government, and they haven’t got the data, they haven’t got the tools. They are still coming to some extent, unclear about what their role should be, and this is absolutely critical if we want to open up our economy again. I think it’s telling that you got an honest answer about the reason testing was abandoned in March. What we were told, the public, was told was that it wasn’t appropriate for an economy of our size. Our institutions... You know, we talk about the Government all the time letting us down, but Public Health England made that decision. In Germany they devolved it very quickly into the local authorities. I would also say, I mean, we can’t have the whole of the United Kingdom hanging on developing an app. Test and trace is possible to do manually. Most of it, as you said, will happen manually, even with the app. The app is 15 minutes in proximity, two metres, to somebody. It’s just an adjunct. You can remember if you were with somebody for 15 minutes. Yeah. You know, we need to get test and trace rolled out manually, and if the app comes along and helps us do it then great, but we can’t wait for that. But it’s also about people receiving accurate information. When you have public health officials, when you have Government scientists, saying things which are manifestly untrue, which is that it wasn’t appropriate — it was actually all about resources, but they didn’t admit that. And so now we are in a situation again with the trust has broken down, people are desperate to get good quality information they can rely on from their government, from their public health officials, so that people can make the right decision to make the right calculations about risk, about how we get back to normal. I think, Steve, you talked about... Briefly, though, because Ijust want to move on to another question. You talked about ending the blame game. I think the public appreciate that we are in an unprecedented situation and know government is going to get it right, but the thing that frustrates me most about this government is that theyjust don’t have the humility to put their hands up when they’ve actually got it wrong. When they do that they say it’s a U—turn. They are holding their hands up and saying they got it wrong, and then they are told it’s a U—turn, so that’s not an environment that’s conducive to people making the right decisions, is it? That is the blame game, that’s exactly what it is. No, but isn’t there a difference between making a U—turn on policy and just lying? There’s a difference between those two things. Well, I certainly think... I certainly think the information, as you just pointed out, that they’ve received from some of our institutions and scientists, and I’m not here to defend them blindly — everybody’s made terrible mistakes. You know, where there was a left turn to make we took the right one on almost every occasion, and we have to learn from it. But I don’t think when we look back there will be any one single reason, you know... Oh, you’re absolutely right, Steve. And I think we have to consider that when we move forward and that’s the most important thing, how we move forward. 0K. Moving forward involves learning from your mistakes and being honest, and unfortunately that gap between the learning behaviour and the transmission of the information about what has been learned and where mistakes were made, and I think that that is problematic for people to have confidence about the information they receive and how they go forward. OK, I’m going to move on because we have another question on a different topic which I want to get in, from Laura Hill. Earlier this week, the Prime Minister announced a review into racial inequality in the country. Isn’t now the time for action rather than just another review? Munira? Absolutely. Unfortunate that the announcement was buried in a piece about Winston Churchill’s statue. People are angry, people are hurting. That’s why despite the fact that we’ve got a public health emergency and nobody wants to see crowds out on the street people feel moved to go out and protest, having been outraged by what they’d seen happen in the US with George Floyd but also with the huge inequalities that have been exposed by the virus. We’ve seen the BAME communities disproportionately affected. Specifically what action do you think should be taken? Well, there’s already been a whole host of reviews where the recommendations have yet to be implemented, and in terms of the Home Office ending the hostile environment would be a good place to start, for instance. But there’s also things like suspicionless stop and search. We know that black individuals are 47 times more likely to be stopped and searched, and I received last week a letter about a 15—year—old mixed race boy in my constituency, a law—abiding young man. I heard from his headteacher. And he has been stopped countless times by the police. They are convinced its racial profiling. When he’s out, even when he’s been out with his white friends, the police have stopped him to question him, but not his white friends. His parents are terrified that at some point he’s going to get into more trouble because he’s going to react to being stopped. This shouldn’t be happening. And there are clearly systemic issues that need to be tackled, and that’s where, you know, David Lammy’s review, we are still waiting for some of those recommendations to be implemented. So, yes, another review is important, but it shouldn’tjust be a research project. It should be setting goals and targets and measures for us to be tracking progress against. I mean, Ijust had a little look through the number of reviews that there have been, and by my counting anyway there have been eight reviews in the last three years looking into race or the effect of race as part of a bigger project. Why do you need another one? Well, reviews are how governments learn about what needs to change, what needs... But most of these are your government reviews and there have been eight in the last three years. Look, I am not going to... I’m not going to suggest that the Government should stop learning and stop understanding, so I’m comfortable with reviews. And, actually, I’m also very proud of the fact that I’m part of the government that has made some real differences. So, for example, and I know these figures will now be distorted because of the situation with the coronavirus, but up until that point the increase in employment had disproportionately benefited people from black and other ethnic minority groups, and having a job I think we would all agree is a foundation stone for a better life. We have looked at the impact of stop and search. When I worked with BorisJohnson when he was Mayor of London we looked at how crime disproportionately affected black Londoners and he has carried that passion now with him into Downing Street. And it’s easy when people say, oh, we should do something, then when asked what it is you should do you are unable to give an answer, because it is not simple and it is not the kind of change that can happen overnight, but I’m incredibly proud of the work that the Prime Minister has done, both as Prime Minister and as Mayor of London, to try and close the gap between the lived experience of ethnic minorities in the UK... We’ve got lots of hands up here, so let’s hear from some of them. Marsha? Can I just say... I think after you’ve mentioned there have been eight reviews, I think reviews aren’t enough. It’s time now for reform. And I think we should start at least by educating children, in school, about black culture and black history. So that it can start there. Ithink... I mean, too many people... If you are saying a 15—year—old was stopped several times by the police and it was racial profiling, that doesn’t come from one specific police officer. That comes from the whole attitude of people in general, police officers in general, and they didn’t go to the police force with that attitude. I think that came from the way they were brought up or things that they have learned, you know, in their lives as they’ve grown up. I think if people had a different attitude towards black people as they grow up it would start there. 0K, lots of hands up. I will try and get round as many of you as I can, so, reasonably briefly, Anthony? People don’t want another review. They want to see change. That’s why they’re on the streets. That’s why it’s brought them out onto the streets. Like you said, eight reviews — and what has changed for them? All that I see is that there is a large section of this nation who are disenfranchised with the whole scenario. They want to see change. And there are things that can be done. You know, we could teach the children about black history in school, they can introduce culture, black culture and ethnic culture into the curriculum. It’s their country. People have got to be made to feel like it’s their country, but they’re not. Sorry, I will come back to you, James, forgive me — I will allow you to come back in. Tony? Yeah. I’m afraid all this carries on. I have a right to my expression as well. And the black population puts itself about — The Black Lives Matter movement is excellent, but they do themselves no favours when they riot in London. There is plenty of government legislation for racial equality. The Government have done a lot to try and make sure that we have racial equality. It’s the people that get it wrong, and I’m afraid a lot of the time the way that the Black Lives Matter movement conducts itself does them no good at all, does them no favours. Well, Tony, as I’m sure as you know, there was violence but it was from a minority of people, and there were huge amounts of peaceful protests on the streets as well. Belinda? Just listening to what James has been saying and also some of the other audience members, you know, we do need to learn, for all the points we’ve been discussing this evening, and like the audience member said, it’s time for action. And just the previous comment then shows a certain element of ignorance about what is actually happening right now. As a teacher, you know, our curriculum changed and was reduced to become English Heritage, and it’s not just about black history that we need to learn. It’s about our history, our Anglo centric history, warts and all, that needs to be learned, and also needs to be put into learning now, so that we don’t have future generations with similar attitudes that willjust perpetuate this. Sue? Stephen Lawrence was killed before my son was born and he’s graduated now. The Macpherson report of recommendations were not put into place. Grenfell was another case where we said, this has to be a watershed and things have to change. We can go all the way back to Windrush. Nothing is changing. Review after review after review, and we have peaceful Black Lives Matter demonstrations, and it’s the white supremacists who turn up, if you like, who are causing the trouble at these demonstrations. But it’s not individuals. This is institutional and it goes through the whole of the UK society. Steve, let me bring you back to Laura’s original question. Earlier this week the Prime Minister announced a review into racial inequality in the country. Is it now the time for action rather than just another review? I absolutely think it’s time for action. I mean, we have some experience of this. We have a big academy with 212 boys in it at any one time and, you know, there are many, many facets of this problem that we all accept exists. One of the biggest ones I see is really based around social mobility, and the frustrating thing for me is that we all have it in our power to make a difference. You know, again, this is one of those things we can put to Government, or we can make a change. What I see in the boys we’ve got is that they don’t have... Even if they are, you know, academically strong and bright, they don’t have the networks that we have. They don’t get the opportunities that people in our network get. And all of the people that were involved in the protests, you know, from the privilege side of the debate, if you like, can all make a difference. They all run companies, own companies, they can give opportunities, whether it is work experience, internships, to help people along the road on the journey. And we can start making a difference now. We can all individually start making a difference tomorrow, and we know we can. And we don’t need to wait for a Government review to do it. The Government review might help, it might come up with things that we can do with the police and to change attitudes. I certainly think, having looked at this whole issue of history and statues, that we need to review some things. You know, I think if we wouldn’t put a statue up of that person now, why would we continue to have it? Do we want a statue to a man who brought 90,000 slaves into the country and killed 19,000 of them? You know, not for me. Whilst I think there are people like Churchill, who although misguided in some beliefs at the time overall were a force for good, so I’d like to see real change. I’d like to see us grasp the moment that we’ve got and have some kind of way that we bring about more equality, certainly in the workplace. Jed? I think Steve said so many important things there, and we’ve heard a lot of really great points as well. I’d like to maybe bring in a timely example, because there was a recent review which looked at the effects of Covid, and one of the troubling findings was about the vulnerability of certain ethnicities to coronavirus, specifically in terms of front line health care staff. And I certainly think that an opportunity was missed to look at the risks that people are experiencing based on their ethnicity and whether there should be redeployment of some staff, whether there should be changes in roles and that should be factored in. As someone who’s still got a lot of friends who are in the medical profession, some of whom are in those particularly vulnerable groups, I do worry that something should’ve been done, that that review should’ve been acted upon, and I can’t think of a better example in terms of the time we are at now. Lisa? Well, I was a bit concerned to hear Tony saying that the way the Black Lives Matter protesters conduct themselves doesn’t help their cause, because I’ve been tremendously inspired actually by a lot of the young people who’ve come out and taken to the streets in recent weeks, and I think they are standing up and using their voice and the platform that they have in order to try and get change while generation after generation have been failed. You know, James said, "Well, what you actually want to be done?" But the Government itself has sponsored four reviews in the last four years which have made 201 recommendations. Those recommendations actually have common themes to them. It’s about changing recruitment practices so we get far better representation at every level in the criminaljustice system, in the workplaces and across society. It’s about having a better education system so that people to understand how this clinician actually works and understand the complexity of the history that we’ve got. It’s about having better legal representation. It’s about incomes as well. We were just talking about child poverty, but actually if you’re black you’re more likely to be poor, you’re more likely to be stopped by the police. There are real disparities in the immigration system as well. These are things that should be well known to any politician of any party. And thing now is that we get on and implement them. You can see why people are so frustrated. And I’lljust say this as well. My dad’s generation were amongst those who fought for racial equality in this country. And they did make huge strides forward. The way that they did it in the end was through leadership, people like Roy the end was through leadership, people like RoyJenkins who stepped forward to bring in the Race Relations Act, and that was at a time that that was deeply controversial and pretty unpopular in Britain. I would say to James, I in Britain. I would say tojames, I think the in Britain. I would say to James, I think the Government’s in action is based on a very dim view of people in this country. Most people in this in this country. Most peopla in this country now in this country. Most people in this country now strongly believe discrimination harms all of us even if we are not strongly affected by it. We care about one another, we it. We rare about one another, we are a it. We care about one another, we are a tolerant society, and the Government really needs to get on and implement the recommendations from these reports, not and implement the recommendations from these reports, notjust kick from these reports, not just kick this into from these reports, notjust kick this into the long grass because if we have learned anything over the last few weeks it is that this just won’t cut it any more. James, won’t cut it any more. james, promised to won’t cut it any more. James, promised to let you back in. Thank you. I promised to let you back in. Thank you. lam not and promised to let you back in. Thank you. lam notand I promised to let you back in. Thank you. I am not and I would never you. lam not and Iwould never suggest that you. I am not and I would never suggest that there is an improvement that could be made. There is a huge amount of improvement that could be made. But to imply that we’ve not progressed is made. But to imply that we’ve not progressed isjust made. But to imply that we’ve not progressed is just factually wrong, and deeply insulting. Steve and I grew up in South East London, and although he is infinitely better looking, he has a couple of years older, and I remember when the National older, and I remember when the Nationalfront march older, and I remember when the National front march through my streets... That would never happen now. when streets... That would never happen now. When I was first elected onto now. when I was first eluted onto the now. When I was first elected onto the London assembly. I sat next to an elected member of the British National Party, and explicitly racist political party, elected into racist political party, eluted into the racist political party, elected into the London Government by the voters of London. That would never happen now. When I was at school I had no now. when I was at school I had no idea... My mum now. When I was at school I had no idea... My mum was a black nurse, and my parents were a mixed race couple, getting spat at in the street. That would never happen now. We have progressed so far. And, yes, there’s definitely room for improvement, but to deny the positive steps this country has made... Come on... We are asking why... That level of progress and that level of ambition? You know what needs to be done. Sire make the point I am making... And, again, I have been taught -- point I am making... And, again, I have been taught —— I have been have been taught -- I have been taught black have been taught —— I have been taught black people in business, in taught black peopla in business, in the civil taught black people in business, in the civil service, we are moving in the right direction and, yes, we should always aspire to move further and faster, but we must never deny the progress we have made. Otherwise, unsurprisingly, young black people in Britain will think black peopla in Britain will think that black people in Britain will think that there has been no progress, and that’s just wrong. It’s wrong. 0K, Lisa, I’m sure you want to come back in, but I’m afraid our error is up. You’re shaking your head. Sorry, Lisa, I You’re shaking your head. Sorry, Lisa, Iran’t You’re shaking your head. Sorry, Lisa, I can’t bring you back in. We are out of time. Today our questions fame are out of time. Today our questions came from Plymouth. Thank you to all of you, and next week as the last in the current series and we are looking at an audience, a special audience of people under the age of 30. Remember audience of people under the age of 30. Rememberthat, audience of people under the age of 30. Remember that, folks. You can 30. Remember that, folks. You ran apply to be in our 30. Remember that, folks. You can apply to be in our virtual audience if you are under the age of 30 from anywhere in the UK. Do get in touch. The way to do it is to go to the website and apply the usual way, as I say, the Question Time website, and we will get back in touch with you. If you want to carry on tonight’s discussion, you can, as tonight’s discussion, you ran, as always, every tonight’s discussion, you can, as always, every week, carry on that discussion with Question Time Extra Time, on Five Live now. But thank you to all of you for coming tonight. Lisa, thank you for you to all of you for coming tonight. Lisa, thank you forjoining tonight. Lisa, thank you for joining us down tonight. Lisa, thank you forjoining us down the line. I know you are in that room so we couldn’t hear your five-year-old that room so we couldn’t hear your five—year—old and I can tell you we five-year-old and I ran tell you we didn’t hear your five—year—old and I can tell you we didn’t hear your fibro tonight. Thank you to all of you for didn’t hear your fibro tonight. Thank you to all of you forjoining Thank you to all of you for joining in I kind Thank you to all of you forjoining in I kind of flavour of what in I kind of ﬂavour of what question in I kind of flavour of what question time used to be like and we will get back there one day —— will get back there one day -- didn’t will get back there one day —— didn’t hear your five—year—old didn’t hear your five-year-old tonight. And didn’t hear your five—year—old tonight. And of course thank you to all of you for watching Question Time.