Welcome to Question Time and on the panel tonight, Robert Buckland, the justice panel tonight, Robert Buckland, the Justice Secretary, formerly Solicitor General for England and Walas Solicitor General for England and Wales and prisoners minister, Weiss and prisoners minister, joining us Wales and prisoners minister, joining us from Cardiff, the Labour joining us from Cardiff, the labour Health joining us from Cardiff, the Labour Health Minister, previously the youngest ever President of the Welsh TUC, Vaughan Gething, Liz Seville—Roberts elected as an MP in Seville-Roberts eluted as an MP in 2015 and Seville—Roberts elected as an MP in 2015 and currently the leader of Plaid Cymm 2015 and currently the leader of Plaid Cymru in the House of Commons, Plaid Cymm in the House of Commons, Rocco Forte, a Plaid Cymru in the House of Commons, Rocco Forte, a hotelier with the business in his blood, he worked with his father at the start of his career and in 1996 started his own EWUP career and in 1996 started his own group of luxury hotels. And prolific author and professor of creative writing at Brunel University and writing at anel University and joint winner writing at Brunel University and joint winner of the Booker prize last year for joint winner of the Booker prize last yearfor her joint winner of the Booker prize last year for her novel Bernardine Evaristo. Good evening and welcome to my guest here in the studio and Vaughan Gething joining us down the line and to our audience, virtual audience, thank you for being here, you’re joining audience, thank you for being here, you’rejoining us from Cardiff audience, thank you for being here, you’re joining us from Cardiff and the Cardiff area. Lovely to have you with us. If you want to join the Cardiff area. Lovely to have you with us. If you want tojoin in the Cardiff area. Lovely to have you with us. If you want to join in the with us. If you want tojoin in the conversation, with us. If you want to join in the conversation, you can contact the programme at BBC Question Time on social media and be part of the conversation. Let us start with our first question tonight from our virtual audience, Tessa Marshall. will you virtual audience, Tessa Marshall. Will you commit to educating the will you commit to educating the British Will you commit to educating the British public about the atrocities of the British Empire, take down the statues of slave traders in the UK stames of slave traders in the UK and will you statues of slave traders in the UK and will you apologise for paying off of the owners of slaves and accept -- a off of the owners of slaves and accept —— a doubt that the British accept -- a doubt that the British peopla accept -- a doubt that the British people were accept —— a doubt that the British people were paying off as late as 2015. I think we have got to confront our history warts and all and while there are many things we ran be proud and while there are many things we can be proud about with regards to ran be proud about with regards to Britain can be proud about with regards to Britain and its history, there is a lot that we need to confront and be honest about that is bad about our history. I honest about that is bad about our history. Ithink honest about that is bad about our history. I think that applying the standards today to what may have happened many hundreds of years ago is a difficult concept to say the least. And I think rather than using the language of blame and apology, we should be the language of blame and apology, we should he being honest about it, we should be being honest about it, being we should he being honest about it, being forthright about it, using democratic processes, wherever possible, to deal with it. Let us take for example, particular statues take for example, particular status to take for example, particular stames to slave take for example, particular statues to slave traders in Bristol or elsewhere, use the democratic process, through a proper decision decide what to do with that particular memorial or statue. Do you think they were wrong to tear it down? I think they were. Whilst I down? I think they were. whilst I absolutely down? I think they were. Whilst I absolutely get and understand the huge strength of feeling that has been engendered as a result of that appalling incident in Minneapolis and the fact that many people have and the fact that many peopla have just had and the fact that many people have just had enough and I get that utterty, I just had enough and I get that utterty, Ido just had enough and I get that utterly, I do think that we all utterty, I do think that we all await to utterly, I do think that we all await to each other to respect the mle of await to each other to respect the rule of law and work for greater mle of law and work for greater equality. I rule of law and work for greater equality. I think the scenes that we saw in Bristol were disturbing in the sense that they did not seem to be that sense of order. Your the sense that they did not seem to be that sense of order. YourJustice be that sense of order. Your justice Secretary, do be that sense of order. YourJustice Secretary, do you want to see those peopla Secretary, do you want to see those people prosecuted? An investigation peopla prosecuted? An investigation is ongoing, people prosecuted? An investigation is ongoing, we have to let the police do their is ongoing, we have to let the police do theirjob independently and let the prosecuting authorities follow the evidence wherever it leads. The point I am making is if we stand for something together, collectively, in this great country, collactively, in this great country, it has got to collectively, in this great country, it has got to be the rule of law and it has got to be the ml; of law and those it has got to be the rule of law and those values of freedom that attracted so many people here in the first place and make this country, whilst it is imperfect and there is a huge amount for us to do, a good place to live, because we have that underpinning of the rule of law and underpinning of the mle of law and democracy. underpinning of the rule of law and democracy. Let us celebrate that but also confront the past as well. Tessa, when you said you want the government to apologise for reparations paid to countries until 2015 for slavery, what are you referring to? The debt that we were paying off refers to the £20 million that was paid off to slave owners when slavery became a legal in 1837 and that debt is something that the British Government was paying off as late as 2015. Robert? I think the history of our islands is always with us. Where are we paying that with us. where are we paying that debt off with us. Where are we paying that debt off until 2015? I think she is right, I have read reports similarly right, I have read reports similarty about right, I have read reports similarly about that. She makes a very powerful point about the fact that you cannot escape history and I think it would be fundamentally dishonest of us through removing stames dishonest of us through removing statues and airbrushing out history status and airbrushing out history to then statues and airbrushing out history to then pretend that all was well. Totalitarian regimes do that and Communist regimes and other extreme regimes do that sort of thing and then pretend that all is well. No, we need to be honest, face up to it and accept the fact that we are as much prisoners of our history as anything else, but we have a chance, through democracy, to break anything else, but we have a chance, through democracy, to breakfree anything else, but we have a chance, through democracy, to break free and progress. progress. Bernardine. I progress. Bernardine. Idisagree, I relish that statue being toppled in Bristol. They had tried for decades to either get the statue removed or get a park put on the statute to provide the context for Edward Colson’s history as a slave trader and I think everybody now knows that he was culpable in terms of some 80,000 Africans been enslaved in the New World and 20,000 of those Africans were also lost at sea. He was a really toxic symbol in Bristol and it was really important that he should go, or at least be contextualised and people tried to contextualised and peopla tried to do that contextualised and people tried to do that and I tried for decades and they did not get anywhere with it. It felt to me that it was totally right that they should topple that statue, because of what he represented and I am totally for a lot of the other statues in this country being removed and perhaps re—contextualised in museums or somewhere where we actually understand what role they played in society in a wider sense. The whole idea. what society in a wider sense. The whole idea. What statues for example? idea. what stames for example? There idea. What statues for example? There was somebody removed from outside the Museum of London for example. Robert Milligan. There is also an argument about Lord Nelson, who are such a totemic figure. Would you want to see his statue come down? I think we need to have that conversation, probably. There is also this argument that has come up in terms of the statues, that we cannot change history and that it is the rannot change history and that it is the history of cannot change history and that it is the history of this country, but actually history is a construction. Events happen, we have a past, and then historians contextualised that past and interrogated and what has happened in this country is historically that has been done by a late white men who have been the historians who have set the framework for the events of the past. History is something that needs to be challenged and re—interrogated and revised constantly. Removing the statues is constantly. Removing the status is in a constantly. Removing the statues is in a sense, it is giving power to the people who really do object to a the peopla who really do object to a symbol of the people who really do object to a symbol of their historical slavery and all their allies as well. The other thing about history is that history has always excluded, primarily women, and people of primarily women, and peopla of colour primarily women, and people of colour and working class people and colour and working class peopla and LGBT cue plus colour and working class people and LGBT cue plus people in the ways it LGBT cue plus peopla in the ways it has LGBT cue plus people in the ways it has been told and that also goes to what you were saying about the colonial history. A lot of people in colonial history. A lot of peopla in this country do colonial history. A lot of people in this country do not understand the colonial history or the understand it through a certain prism, where they feel that Britain went and travelled all over the world in order to help people. There is still a section of society who do not think slavery was a really bad thing. I think it is really thing. Ithink it is really important thing. I think it is really important that we interrogate history and when you have to take the law into your own hands and remove the statue, nobody died, it is just a little tin statue that was thrown into a river, and that then led to this conversation we are lad to this conversation we are having now, led to this conversation we are having now, about the rest of the relic of having now, about the rest of the relics of Britain’s murky past and I relic of Britain’s murky past and I think it is relics of Britain’s murky past and I think it is really important. When think it is really important. when Tessa think it is really important. When Tessa talks about removing statues Tessa talks about removing status of Tessa talks about removing statues of anyone who has profited from Empire, I of anyone who has profited from Empire, lam of anyone who has profited from Empire, I am wondering, where does that go? The visual symbols, the statues are really toxic and they stames are really toxic and they really are an statues are really toxic and they really are an affront to our shared humanity and I think at least we need to look at that and, you know, Britain was built on the wealth of slavery and colonialism, that is the truth. And we don’t really admit that. Rocco. There is a quote from Nelson Mandela that says hiding our history is not the route to enlightenment, we have to understand our history and we have to confront it. And I agree very much with what Robert Buckland was saying, that we rannot Robert Buckland was saying, that we cannot judge Robert Buckland was saying, that we cannotjudge the past by the values cannot judge the past by the values of today. It cannotjudge the past by the values of today. It seems that people are of today. It seems that peopla are trying to of today. It seems that people are trying to use the evil of slavery to rewrite the history of this country. And try and negate the heritage that this country has. Do you think it was wrong to take down the statue of Edward Colson? I think it was wrong to take it down in that way and any vandalism of any kind is completely unacceptable. It is against the law and it is disgraceful that the police, were not there in sufficient numbers to prevent that happening. People have made comparison. The worst aspect for me of the London demonstration, seeing police running demonstration, seeing police mnning away from demonstration, seeing police running away from demonstrators, in fear, that is a breakdown of law and order and it is mob rule and it is and it is mob ml; and it is completely and it is mob rule and it is completely unacceptable. When you completely unacceptable. when you talk completely unacceptable. When you talk about vandalism, one example is, and I am not equating them, but is, and lam not equating them, but the Bertin is, and I am not equating them, but the Berlin Wall is, and I am not equating them, but the Berlin Well for example, where the Bertin Wall for example, where people just the Berlin Well for example, where people just pulled it down themselves and the police to buy and let it happen. I’m not trying to say they are the same, but nonetheless, . .. they are the same, but nonetheless,... No, but they are the same, but nonetheless, . .. No, but the they are the same, but nonetheless,... No, but the argument nonetheless”. No, but the argument that is made nonetheless,... No, but the argument that is made is that it was something that people took upon themselves to do. There have been stames themselves to do. There have been statues of themselves to do. There have been stames of long themselves to do. There have been statues of long forgotten people at status of long forgotten peoplo at a time statues of long forgotten people at a time when the country is Sleepwalking to economic a time when the country is sleepwalking to economic disaster slaemlking to economic disaster and our Sleepwalking to economic disaster and our children are being prevented from going to school. We will deal with one thing at a time. It is mind—boggling. Let us talk to some mind-boggling. Let us talk to some of our mind—boggling. Let us talk to some of our virtual audience. I think it is important that as a society we look at the past, we don’t need to glorify or celebrate the events of the past that we as a nation took part in. I agree that statues that have links to the past, where there are issues related to slavery, do need to be taken down. I’m not asking for them to be had, I think they need to be in a museum, because they are great places to educate and help remember the past. Maybe even have history have history about colonialism and ethnic minority communities in the curriculum and I think that would be an important step for us as a society. I agree completely with what was said about the fact, I went to university in Bristol and four years it has been a topic of discussion to take it down and the voices are democratic, people have been asking to take it down and they have been ignored. Who are they have been ignored. who are they trying to have been ignored. Who are they trying to protect? They were trying to protect the name and you say it was disturbing that it was taken down, if you think about the people down, if you think about the peopla it has down, if you think about the people it has affected and the ancestors of people passing it every day, to see someone glorify when they have killed thousands of people and are killed thousands of peopla and are being killed thousands of people and are being celebrated in a way so being celabrated in a way so publicly. I being celebrated in a way so publicly. I don’t agree with what Rocco or the Justice publicly. I don’t agree with what Rocco or theJustice Secretary publicly. I don’t agree with what Rocco or the Justice Secretary said Rocco or the justice Secretary said there. Rocco or the Justice Secretary said there. There are still people just that may are there. There are still people just that mag are trying to justify what that may are trying to justify what that that mag are trying to justify what that man did. Elaine. I like the second part of the question because there will be equal measures on both sides and I am really interested in how we will all come together and have a critical conversation about how we can have a critical conversation about how we ran go have a critical conversation about how we can go forward with this how we ran go forward with this issue. how we can go forward with this issue. Let me come to how we can go forward with this issue. Let me come toJohn Williams issue. Let me come to john Williams on that. john, you issue. Let me come toJohn Williams on that. John, you wanted to take on that. john, you wanted to take this question on that. John, you wanted to take this question forward. Will the possible taking down of 60 statues in the UK advance the cause of Black Lives Matter? Vaughan, this leads on from Tessa’s question, whether or not taking the status question, whether or not taking the statues down is productive, whether stames down is productive, whether you approved statues down is productive, whether you approved of what happened in Bristol. Is it perhaps obscuring a larger or helping a larger discussion? I am larger or helping a larger discussion? lam pleased larger or helping a larger discussion? I am pleased that larger or helping a larger discussion? I am pleased thatJohn discussion? lam pleased that john has discussion? I am pleased thatJohn has made his point. I do think some of the statues need to come down and of the stames need to come down and others of the statues need to come down and others that stay up need greater context, about who those figures were. But the Black Lives Matter is were. But the Black Lives Mather is not a campaign were. But the Black Lives Matter is not a campaign to re—engineer our not a campaign to re-engineer our pub“: not a campaign to re-engineer our public space not a campaign to re—engineer our public space and remove statues. It is not even about the death of George Floyd, it is about the persistent and continuing racial inequality and in America and other countries around the world and in our own. That is the point. Within our own. That is the point. within that, this is only our own. That is the point. Within that, this is only one small part about the debate we have to have, and also about the action we need to take. All of us are painfully familiar with the fact that the criminal familiar with the fact that the criminaljustice act is different, criminal justice act is different, if you look at criminaljustice act is different, if you look at people like me or if you look at peopla like me or Robert, and if you look at people like me or Robert, and they are different and that is the action that we need to be taken, and not get led down a be taken, and not get lad down a blind alley. It be taken, and not get led down a blind alley. It is not examining our distant past and rewriting our history, it is understanding our past to help build our history, it is understanding our past to help build ourfuture. The past to help build our future. The “Y past to help build ourfuture. The way politicians talk about this matter is. I think the Prime Minister would be in a better position to do his job Minister would be in a better position to do hisjob if he recognised at the start of the 21st—century talking about watermelon 2lst—century talking about watermelon smiles 21st—century talking about watermelon smiles was not helpful. We ran watermelon smiles was not helpful. We can all learn from this and take We ran all learn from this and take the We can all learn from this and take the opportunity of this extraordinary movement to accept the view of our past, but it is much more important to make changes to our shared future. Liz, you will want to respond. Looking at our shared future. Liz, you will want to respond. Looking atJohn and want to respond. Looking at john and Tessa’s want to respond. Looking atJohn and Tessa’s question, it is two size of the same coin. Should we be taking stames the same coin. Should we be taking statues down and removing portraits commemorating people who profited commemorating peopla who profited from commemorating people who profited from slavery or the Empire? Or is that counter—productive in terms of that counter-productive in terms of looking at the that counter—productive in terms of looking at the bigger issue? Certainly this is a time where I look back to the time when I was raised in Eltham and the appalling murder of Stephen Lawrence. At that time it drove many establishment changes, but it did not drive enough, we know that. We know that we live in a racist society. There is one thing I could refer back to, about what Vaughan said. This is disappointing. Frankly, I about what Vaughan said. This is disappointing. Frankly, Ithink about what Vaughan said. This is disappointing. Frankly, I think we disappointing. Frankly, Ithinkwe are trying to disappointing. Frankly, I think we are trying to fight from the same corner. You do know that Plaid Cymru corner. You do know that Plaid Cymm and Adam corner. You do know that Plaid Cymru and Adam Price has called for an and Adam Price has rallad for an enquiry into and Adam Price has called for an enquiry into structural racism in enquiry into stmctural racism in Walas in enquiry into structural racism in Wales in response to his questioning that the First Minister of Wales responded to, supported the concept of a black and minority ethnic museum in Wales and it has been Plaid Cymm museum in Wales and it has been Plaid Cymru who has been leading on Plaid Cymm who has been leading on the major point, Plaid Cymru who has been leading on the major point, which is changes to the curriculum. Vaughan is referring to oils compared to a colonial outpost. One of the petty things we do in politis outpost. One of the petty things we do in politics in the United Kingdom do in politic in the United Kingdom is bring it down do in politics in the United Kingdom is bring it down to personalities. These are big, serious questions. Looking at the statues, and I raised Looking at the statics, and I raised this Looking at the statues, and I raised this yesterday with the Prime Minister, what we have within the United Kingdom is a way of presenting history very much through the eyes of the Conservatives. The Prime Minister, when I asked him on this question, is that conservatives do not pull down statues. It was the imagery of the past and yet, and I know the Lord Chancellor will agree with this, we have much better legislation in place to deal with lagislation in place to deal with racial legislation in place to deal with racial hatred, but we still live within a racist society which acts on racism. The question I have is, how are we going to bring about the big, social changes? The big changes in attitudes? That is why the statues are so interesting because they are so symbolic of a certain sort of history that said the Empire was fine, the British Empire was a force for good in the world. This is not two. force for good in the world. This is not true. Now is the time to come to not tme. Now is the time to come to recognise it is not not true. Now is the time to come to recognise it is notjust the history recognise it is not just the history of powerful, recognise it is notjust the history of powerful, white men who often made their money and their fortunes out of the sufferings of others. Now is the time for the voice of the others to come through and that is my hope for the future. We are having this discussion here, but it has to go beyond the usual talking heads or politicians and get into our curriculum and really change people’s attitudes. Slavery has bred racism. As a person in a responsible position I cannot even bring myself to position I rannot even bring myself to repeat position I cannot even bring myself to repeat what some politicians, including our Prime minister, has said in the past about ethnic minorities. I have been reading history at AS—level and revising history at AS-level and revising with my son. history at AS—level and revising with my son. The curriculum needs to change. The War of independence is depicted as the Indian mutiny. That needs to change. Especially for children who are born and bred over here. My son considers himself as Welsh. And for him to read history in a different manner than what I have read, and what I have read recently, I think it is important that violence should be condemned, that violance should be condemned, but that violence should be condemned, but racism from top down needs to be dealt with. I am very proud to live in Cardiff and to have worked in Cardiff for the last 25 years. It is a multicultural society, but we need to make sure from the top down, from Doris to make sure from the top down, from Boris downwards, we need to deal with this racism. Robert, you heard the Prime Minister talk about this yesterday, at Prime Minister’s Questions, the comment he made about taken in wave it at the Queen and watermelon smiles, has come back to haunt him. What will we see from the haunt him. what will we see from the government if haunt him. What will we see from the government if anything? The Prime Minister who was mayor or probably the most cosmopolitan city in the world and who was elected twice and world and who was eluted twice and whose world and who was elected twice and whose approach to issues of migration and multiculturalism has been open, liberal and inclusive. And his remarks in the aftermath of the unlawful killing of George Floyd I think were appropriate. They stmck I think were appropriate. They struck the right tone and he talked stmck the right tone and he talked in a positive struck the right tone and he talked in a positive way about what needed to be done. I think absolutely we have the right approach. I think that sense of trying to bring people together is what we need now. I think a lot of the remarks are on the money when it comes to the fact that rather than focusing upon icons and statues, actions speak far louder than words. Vaughan has made the point about the criminal justice system and I have responsibility for that in England and Wales and I take that in England and Walas and I take responsibility that in England and Wales and I take responsibility for the need to improve the way in which we deal with black and minority ethnic peopla in with black and minority ethnic people in that system. There are a whole range of things that we are whola range of things that we are doing. No whole range of things that we are doing. No time to go into them now, but the practical measures we have got to do to make their experience different. The black population in Walas different. The black population in Wales is overrepresented by five times within the prison population of Wales. Surely that is a desperate failure? That is an indication of the racism in our side society in action. Would you commit to using that as a target, to reduce that an acceptable percentage within the prison population? Specifically in Wales? Of course it applies throughout England and Wales. I throughout England and Walas. I would throughout England and Wales. I would commit to making sure that the problams that would commit to making sure that the problems that are inherited by the criminal problems that are inherited by the criminaljustice problems that are inherited by the criminal justice system problems that are inherited by the criminaljustice system are dealt criminal justice system are dealt with criminaljustice system are dealt with further up the line and the diversions that I needed in order to help people of that background not help peopla of that background not to get into help people of that background not to get into the system in the first place I what we are going to have to do. That is not place I what we are going to have to do. That is notjust me, that is do. That is not just me, that is education, do. That is notjust me, that is education, health, housing, the whole apparatus of government in whola apparatus of government in Walas whole apparatus of government in Wales and Westminster coming together around the problem of the individual, rather together around the problem of the individual, ratherthan together around the problem of the individual, rather than this silo approach where I end up responsible for assisting with a disproportionate number of young peopla from disproportionate number of young people from that background. This is peopla from that background. This is a mass people from that background. This is a mass refusal to engage in the reality that the Prime Minister has been deeply offensive at the start of the 21st century, it is a real issue. For people like me it issue. For peopla like me it matters, just issue. For people like me it matters, just as someone comparing the experience of Wales to colour people in the American experience. It matters and it is offensive. If we want to It matters and it is offensive. If we we nt to move It matters and it is offensive. If we want to move on, we have got to we wantto move on, we have goth accept it is not we want to move on, we have got to accept it is not acceptable and you get credit for yourself and the party- If you get credit for yourself and the party. If you could only acknowledge what is staring you in the face. It does not matter that I am a politician, I am this colour every singla day of politician, I am this colour every single day of the year and it matters to me that we are spoken about in a way that reflects who we about in a way that reﬂacts who we are and about in a way that reflects who we are and not the colour of our skin and make sure you are not making these mealy—mouthed apologies for these meaty-mouthed apologies for things these mealy-mouthed apologies for things that these mealy—mouthed apologies for things that are clearly wrong. I things that are dearty wrong. I found things that are clearly wrong. I found Boris offensive all along with his journalism found Boris offensive all along with hisjournalism in found Boris offensive all along with his journalism in the Spectator, with the racist things he said. When with the racist things he said. when he with the racist things he said. When he became Mayor of London he became mayor of an incredibly multicultural city, but one of the first things to try to do was get rid of Black History Month. We are talking about the importance of history and acknowledging the past and also we acknowladging the past and also we should acknowledging the past and also we should be celebrating the entire population, people of colour and our contribution to this society, we have been here since the Romans, it is something I have written about. We have a mayor who tries to get rid of the single thing that we do to of the singla thing that we do to bring to of the single thing that we do to bring to the wider public the fact that we have a history. The truth is black history is a British history, this is a multicultural country and it always has been. British history is world history because we had an empire that ruled over a quarter of empire that mled over a quarter of the world empire that ruled over a quarter of the world for a very long time. I really do not accept you apologising or trying to present Boris really do not accept you apologising or trying to present BorisJohnson or trying to present Boris johnson in a good or trying to present BorisJohnson in a good light because I found him in a good light because Ifound him deeply in a good light because I found him deeply offensive. Robert, do you want to respond to that? I am moving on in a moment. This is the Prime Minister after all, the leader of your Minister afber all, the leader of your party. Minister after all, the leader of your party. I would say Minister after all, the leader of your party. I would sayjournalists your party. I would say journalists write your party. I would sayjournalists write lots of things and lots of polemic that they would later come to regret and not choose to do now. I would say this... Has the Prime Minister ever said that he regretted using those terms? I cannot speak using those terms? I rannot speak about using those terms? I cannot speak about what might have been written 15 or so years ago. I have to judge him on his actions as a politician. I see somebody who understands the challenges we face, accept them and faces up to them and wants to do something about them. All right. This is a subject we could talk about for the entire programme. There are a lot of other questions, so I will move on now to Rosenna so I will move on now to Rosanna Alim. so I will move on now to Rosenna Alim. Good evening. Like myself and many other independent restaurants, our restaurant is very much a family -based and our restaurant is very much a family —based and five of our family members are dependent on that business. Since Covid—19 has come business. Since Covid-19 has come around, social business. Since Covid—19 has come around, social distancing seems to be inevitable in hospitality. Once lockdown is lifted we will have 25 to SON: lockdown is lifted we will have 25 to 50% of our capacity and we feel to 5096 of our capacity and we feel that only to 50% of our capacity and we feel that only fixed costs may be covered, or may not be covered. In the short—term and long—term what the short-term and long-term what strategies will the short—term and long—term what strategies will the government and stakeholder organisations put forward for our industry? Taken into account so much debt has been created for independent business family firms? You mention social distancing and two metres in this country is the acceptable distance. Rocco, I want to come to your first with your hotel business. Yes, this two metres social distancing rule two metres social distancing mic has two metres social distancing rule has come out of the blue and there is no scientific evidence behind it. The WTO has come out and said if you are two metres away, you have 1% of are two metres away, you have 196 of catching the are two metres away, you have 1% of catching the disease will stop if you are one metre away, you have a Sin you are one metre away, you have a 396 chance you are one metre away, you have a 3% chance of catching the disease. 396 chance of catching the disease. This is 3% chance of catching the disease. This is the WHO. Yes. The reality in continental Europe which has started to open up, is they have gone back to one metre. Some of them, not all of them. We have got China? Germany has. Germany is at 1.5 metres, as is Italy, France and Denmark are at one metre. The reality of this whole thing is no one is concentrating on the economic impact of this. The reality of this disease which at first was thought to be a terrible disease and was going to kill millions of people, it has not millions of peopla, it has not turned millions of people, it has not turned out to be like that. turned out to be like that. A lot of surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.2% surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.296 of peopla who surveys have shown it is 0.1 to 0.2% of people who die if they catch the disease. Other suggestions are it is disease. other suggestions are it is 195 disease. other suggestions are it is 196 and in disease. Other suggestions are it is 1% and in some countries it is 196 and in some countries it is higher. The 1% and in some countries it is higher. The only thorough research that has been done has been done by Stanford or New York, one of the hotbeds in the United States, and it has come out with these figures. The reality of this disease is the average age of people who have died in this country is 80 and one third of them have died in care homes. It of them have died in rare homes. It is a disgrace what of them have died in care homes. It is a disgrace what has happened in the rare is a disgrace what has happened in the care homes. But when it comes to the rare homes. But when it comes to the hospitality the care homes. But when it comes to the hospitality industry, for example, and Rosenna is talking example, and Rosanna is talking about example, and Rosenna is talking about her restaurant, if this government sticks to two metres social distancing, will it be viable social distancing, will it be viabla for you? You social distancing, will it be viable for you? You have got hotels around the world. No. A lot of hotels in this country depend on international travel and if there is no international travel, they will not have customers and they will not be able to open. You are opposing the quarantine as well? Yes, of course. Again, there is no scientific evidence behind it. The chief scientific officer says it is a political decision and not a scientific decision. We are closing down when the rest of Europe is opening up. Until Sunday you could come from Iran and Brazil, the two biggest hotbeds of the disease, with impunity. All of a sudden, no one ran come impunity. All of a sudden, no one can come here. With your hotels in other countries, with your hotels in other countries, ran you open With your hotels in other countries, can you open economically profitably ran you open economically profitably but that can you open economically profitably but that kind of social distancing? It is still difficult but a metre makes it possible. The tourism industry has suffered disproportionately, effectively it has been without income since March and it will continue to be without income in this country until and it will continue to be without income in this country untilJuly income in this country until july and that income in this country untilJuly and that is four months, one third of the year. Many businesses in the tourism industry will go under. You impose quarantine which stops foreigners entering the country, just when there is a chance to save something out of the summer season, it is another nail in the coffin, the two metre rule makes it the two metre mle makes it impossible the two metre rule makes it impossible for people to open property. impossible for people to open properly. Fun, when it comes to property. Fun, when it comes to Walas, property. Fun, when it comes to Wales, the properly. Fun, when it comes to Wales, the First Minister says he does not expect Welsh tourism to be mnning this does not expect Welsh tourism to be running this summer, so what do you mnning this summer, so what do you think in running this summer, so what do you think in terms of what Rosina has said and what Rocco has said? I am proud of the fact that our priority is to keep Wales say. We have taken a deliberately cautious approach of easing out of lockdown because I disagree with Rocco and his characterisation of Covid—19 and the characterisation of Covid-19 and the impact, it is a characterisation of Covid—19 and the impact, it is a dreadful disease, it has taken tens of thousands of lives across the UK and it would have taken more if we had not imposed lockdown when we did. I don’t think you ran try to lockdown when we did. I don’t think you can try to balance of health you ran try to balance of health against the you can try to balance of health against the economy, if we come out of lockdown too quickly, we will see a much greater impact upon our economy. We are looking at a range of measures that we take, will signal more economic activity taking place, but on the basis that we have to do it in the safest way possible to do it in the safest way possibla and that to do it in the safest way possible and that does mean caution. How can and that does mean caution. How ran you help and that does mean caution. How can you help Rosenna? We have a two metre rule in our regulations and we metre mle in our regulations and we have to metre rule in our regulations and we have to consider that we are not about to change the law on that because I think there is good evidence that you are safer, you have double the risk having a one metre rule as opposed to a two metre metre mle as opposed to a two metre mle and metre rule as opposed to a two metre rule and the scientific group advised on that and I am not about to write -- advised on that and I am not about to write —— risk the lives of our to write -- risk the lives of our citizens. The to write —— risk the lives of our citizens. The conclusion of that is that Rosenna’s business might go to the wall. Let us hear from you again. I’m not saying about reducing the social distancing, if that is the law, it is the law, but even if you reduced it to one metre, I don’t think that would make a lot of difference, because I think in the mind of the consumer, it is very much scorched in about the two metre mle, about much scorched in about the two metre rule, about staying away from other mle, about staying away from other peopla. Even if rule, about staying away from other people. Even if you reduced it to half a metre, I think people are half a metre, I think peopla are going to stay half a metre, I think people are going to stay away. The dilemma is going to stay away. The dilamma is not just in the going to stay away. The dilemma is notjust in the next week at going to stay away. The dilemma is not just in the next week at the next two weeks of the next month, this is a longer term problem that hospitality are going to have. Lisa Marie. In Wales more than 95% of our businesses are small and micro businesses and at the moment there are a zero emissions going into one, so there is no evidence really to suggest keeping the lockdown in place, but also how are they going to take into account the impact this is going to have an all these small businesses and our economy in Wales, which could be severely affected if we keep some of these guidelines in place? I we keep some of these guidelines in place? Ijust want we keep some of these guidelines in place? I just want to jazz, we keep some of these guidelines in place? Ijust want to jazz, once place? Ijust want tojau, once furlough has place? Ijust want to jazz, once furlough has ended, she we prepare for mass redundancies? The economy in Wales has always been a house of cards, we are very dependent on the pub“: cards, we are very dependent on the public sector and we should have been leading the way in reopening, but we are not, we are days and weeks behind what Westminster is doing and really, the Welsh Assembly sits on its hands for three weeks, in between throwing out a few little tidbits of very minor or trivial relaxing. Looking at the situation in England, Alok Sharma said that three and a half million jobs at risk hospitality sector and the government is coming under pressure from Conservative MPs to do more for businesses like Rosenna’s and reduce to one metre. Rosenna makes an important point about the confidence people will have and governments peopla will have and governments will people will have and governments will have regulations and have plans and guidance, but without that confidence, then other things will happen and I think she is right to remind us that this isn’t going to be something that we will have an end date do and all will be well, we have extended things like the furlough scheme into October and in Wales about A18,000 people have been Wales about 418,000 people have been supported Wales about A18,000 people have been supported through various government schemes, which is welcome, but this isn’t a problem for weeks or months, this is a problem that will endure for a much longer period. I think within government we are right to have the debate on the debate is happening across the country, because there are different international standards, but I think it is right that we stick to two metres, we have to be clear on that and clarity is something that people demand from government and whilst it is right of us to consider the evidence and constantly evaluate and question and make adjustments, the two metre rule certainly stays for two metre mle certainly stays for the two metre rule certainly stays for the foreseeable and with regard... the foreseeabla and with regard... It is confusing the foreseeable and with regard... It is confusing given that other countries are going for a metre and the WHO is suggesting a metre and others are saying one and a half and it is all one science, so how is that decision made? It is a question of two stages, the evidence and advice you get from Sage when the scientists forms part of the decision—making that is ultimately decision-making that is ultimately political, the decision—making that is ultimately political, the 2—stage approach and political, the 2-stage approach and there political, the 2—stage approach and there will be a number of different factors. The challenge for government now is that we come out of this really intense lockdown is how to get the combination right and that is why there has been a big debate about the quarantine, clearly debate about the quarantine, dearty at the debate about the quarantine, clearly at the time of the height of the outbreak, quarantine would have made no difference but the advice now is that even small adjustments can that even small adjustments ran affect that even small adjustments can affect that R number and it is a constant evaluation to see what adjustments we can make to help adjustments we ran make to help people in the adjustments we can make to help people in the same position as Rosenna and to get the balance right between the need to open up and the need to save lives as well. Bernardine. I don’t know what the solution is, if the hospitality industry really does open up, as you would like, Rocco, how do you keep people safe? You cannot open up with peopla safe? You cannot open up with social people safe? You cannot open up with social distancing, so how do you keep peopla social distancing, so how do you keep people safe? It is up to the consumer to decide what he wants to do. People have been terrified by the government propaganda, and in a “Y the government propaganda, and in a way that is gradually breaking down already and you see it with people already and you see it with peopla on the already and you see it with people on the beaches and people in the parks, they are not social distancing into metres. The only place I have seen it happening is here. We are doing it very well. It is not just here. We are doing it very well. It is notjust propaganda. It is about is not just propaganda. It is about the is notjust propaganda. It is about the livelihoods of millions of peopla, the livelihoods of millions of people, we are not talking about peopla, we are not talking about thousands, people, we are not talking about thousands, we are talking about millions of people who are going to millions of peopla who are going to lose millions of people who are going to lose their millions of peopla who are going to lose theirjobs millions of people who are going to lose theirjobs and their families and it will affect their health and everything else. You cannot and it will affect their health and everything else. You cannotjust everything else. You cannot just say, sweep it everything else. You cannotjust say, sweep it aside or it is just the economy. What about the resorts the economy. what about the resorts in Wales the economy. What about the resorts in Wales which depend entirely on a summer season? Those people are not going to be able to function. They are not going to survive. They have had one winter, and they’re going had one winter, and therre going into had one winter, and they’re going into another winter and summer which should have lifted them up is not going to be there if you carry on like this. All those businesses are going to be devastated, with all the jobs that go with them. It is not just propaganda, I think people are confused just propaganda, I think peopla are confused by just propaganda, I think people are confused by the different information coming out. You have talked about this report from Stanford, no .1, 0.2%. That was not Stanford, no .1, 0.296. That was not peer reviewed Stanford, no .1, 0.2%. That was not peer reviewed another scientists have come out with different figures in of statistics. There was a report in of statistic. There was a report leaked by in of statistics. There was a report leaked by experts in the German government which says the chairman that reaction was completely over—the—top, it was unnecessary, over-the-top, it was unnecessary, they compared over—the—top, it was unnecessary, they compared it they compared it to the the 1918 influenza epidemic which killed inﬂuenza epidemic which killed 25,000 influenza epidemic which killed 25,000 people in Germany on 28,000 25,000 peopla in Germany on 28,000 in this country 25,000 people in Germany on 28,000 in this country and the economy of the world was not lockdown. In 1968 when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong ﬂu which when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong flu which killed over when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong flu which killed overl when I was 23, we had the Hong Kong flu which killed overi million ﬂu which killed overl million peopla flu which killed overi million people worldwide, 80,000 in this peopla worldwide, 80,000 in this country, I people worldwide, 80,000 in this country, I don’t remember anything about it, it was not talked about. And we still have excess deaths and we are the highest country in Europe for deaths. One of the things that the public knows and people can make the public knows and people ran make their own the public knows and people can make their own responses and I think this is the reason why people are still keeping to two metres, Professor Niall Ferguson said it, we went into lockdown too late and we went into lockdown too late because Boris johnson lockdown too late because Boris Johnson likes to think that he will johnson likes to think that he will let peopla Johnson likes to think that he will let people do what they want to do let peopla do what they want to do and he is let people do what they want to do and he is reluctant to take criticisms on this. Here in Wales I criticisms on this. Here in Walas I deeply fear criticisms on this. Here in Wales I deeply fear when the furlough scheme is starting to scale down, it starts to scale down in August when businesses are responsible for taking on their National Insurance and pensions, we have 74% of our and pensions, we have 7496 of our businesses, and pensions, we have 74% of our businesses, who are using the furlough scheme. And of course I represent an area which is deeply dependent on the tourism industry. I fear what is going to happen with that industry and I talk to people, that industry and I talk to peopla, a railway, a that industry and I talk to people, a railway, a jewel in the crown of the heritage railways and they are facing what they called the three winter scenario and when the furlough scheme ceases, regardless of what the Welsh Government says because they have not got the means of funding their own policies, they are going to be facing a situation and many other businesses, where they will be making redundancies this summer. This is the three winter scenario and to come back to the question of public confidence, because it will be public confidence that changes this, we need an effective Test and Trace system in place, that is seen by people to work, both in Wales and in England work, both in Walas and in England and until work, both in Wales and in England and until people have that confidence, then we are going to see the same problem coming up. Alongside this, I beg at both our governments, the Welsh Government and the UK Government, the English government in this respect, look at what is happening to our tourism and hospitality industry and look at our dependence on this, these people will go out of business and there will be immense suffering in terms of unemployment, please do not pull the wool over our eyes, we need these industries into the future and I fear what will happen in the summer. You mention testing and we have a question on that. have a question on that. We have recruited 25,000 contact tracers, however with the Test and Trace results showing that a third of the peopla who results showing that a third of the people who are testing positive are peopla who are testing positive are not providing people who are testing positive are not providing any details for those close contacts, is the system good enough and is it up to scratch? Robert, I will come to you on that because we have had the figures out today from Matt Hancock. Vaughan, ran I start today from Matt Hancock. Vaughan, can I start with you. Contact ran I start with you. Contact tracing has can I start with you. Contact tracing has been happening in Wales for some time but what I do not know is how many people are actually is how many peopla are actually being is how many people are actually being contacted and agreeing to hand over their contacts, being contacted and agreeing to hand overtheir contacts, is being contacted and agreeing to hand over their contacts, is that right? We have not had a proper report at all. I had a meeting about our system today with our oversight EWUP system today with our oversight group and we have had a good start that partly because we have got low numbers, less than 100 G infections numbers, lass than 100 G infections today and numbers, less than 100 G infections today and we don’t have any kind of significant number of people not significant number of peopla not giving their significant number of people not giving their data, in the first week of publication, there were 659 contacts identified and we gave advice to 619 of those contacts, that is a contact rate of 94% and we that is a contact rate of 9496 and we have an that is a contact rate of 94% and we have an effective system and we have delivered that in partnership between the National Health Service and the authorities and I think the question really describes the position in England. In Wales, we position in England. In Walas, we have position in England. In Wales, we have been much more effective and the challenge is how we continue to do that as we progressively unlock more activity when it is safe to do so. Here in Wales, I think we have a so. Here in Walas, I think we have a good story to tell so. Here in Wales, I think we have a good story to tell about contact tracing and I am proud that will what we are doing to deliver that service to keep Wales say. m Do you agree? We know that we had to give up on targets because we know they were impossible to reach on testing. I would go back to the rush testing on contact. We know thousands of tests were taken away from Wales by the UK Government and for some reason I think the people for some reason I think the peopla of Walas for some reason I think the people of Wales deserve to hear the full story of this, and yet I understand you are not releasing the actual e-mail you are not releasing the actual e—mail correspondence that was the e-mail correspondence that was the reason as e—mail correspondence that was the reason as to why we do not have these tests in Wales. Over and above that, representing highly rural that, representing highly mral area” and that, representing highly rural area,, and Betsy, the health board area” and Betsy, the health board has been area,, and Betsy, the health board has been in special measures for five years, people cannot get the results from their tests back again. I am sad to say that we have had lam sadtosaythatwe have had these I am sad to say that we have had these stories, but when it comes to people’s experience on the ground and the critical way we need to get people’s confidence back, they need to see the test working, that is the only way it will unlock people’s confidence and unlock our economy. There are facts to deal with their if I may. when There are facts to deal with their if I may. When it comes to test if I may. when it comes to test results in if I may. When it comes to test results in Wales, over 90% of people results in Walas, over 9096 of peopla get results in Wales, over 9096 of people get their tests results in Wales, over 90% of people get their tests within 48 hours. The idea this is widespread does not match the facts. When it comes to match the facts. when it comes to our testing match the facts. When it comes to our testing capacity, the review I ordered revealed we could not meet those earty ordered revealed we could not meet those early aspirations because those earty aspirations because equipment those early aspirations because equipment was delayed in other countries and some countries stopped the export of testing equipment. We are in a better place, we are well over 12,000 tests. If that was for the whole of the UK, we would have capacity of well over 260,000 tests. We have successfully implemented a We have successfuuy implamented a programme We have successfully implemented a programme and when it comes to test results we are in a decent place, but I want to see us get better which will help us maintain public confidence. I am committed to understanding what we can do to make understanding what we ran do to make it better, understanding what we can do to make it better, openly publishing the data we have, and to give that confidence to people. The facts do confidence to peopla. The facts do not bear confidence to people. The facts do not bear out the comments Liz has actually made. Contact testing was started in Wales and stopped immediately. The only place where it carried on was Ceredigion where they have had the lowest deaths in the lowest rates. Let’s come back to Shakeel’s question. As with every part of the UK we stopped contact tracing in the early part of the tracing in the earty part of the pandemic tracing in the early part of the pandemic because we did not have the resources to carry on doing it. That is the truth of the matter. I wish we had greater capacity to make a different choice, but we made choices and we are making choices now about how we keep people safe and we are doing a decent now about how we keep people safe and we are doing a decentjob compared to other parts of the country. Let me go back to the question, which is talking about the 25,000 contact tracers in England with todars 25,000 contact tracers in England with today’s test and trace results with todars test and trace results showing a with today’s test and trace results showing a third of the people who tested positive are not handed over their contacts to be traced and then isolate. Is that good enough? I think we can do even more. Let’s think we ran do even more. Let’s remember think we can do even more. Let’s remember that meant two thirds did the right thing and of that two thirds, 85% then confirmed they thirds, 5596 then confirmed they would thirds, 85% then confirmed they would self—isolate. That is nearly would self-isolate. That is hearty 27,000 would self—isolate. That is nearly 27,000 people who will now have the benefit of the system. What about benefit of the system. what about the benefit of the system. What about the third that Shakeel is talking about? He is right to draw our attention to the fact that there are still people who are not cooperating. Are you concerned? I am concerned about that, it is all of our collective duty to work with the our collactive duty to work with the authorities, our collective duty to work with the authorities, to do everything we can authorities, to do everything we ran to do our part. authorities, to do everything we can to do our part. We have got to get the message over again and again about the importance of sharing that information and we share it in a voluntary way, but we do it in a spirit of collective coming together spirit of collactive coming together to fight this spirit of collective coming together to fight this virus. I think this is to fight this vims. I think this is only the first to fight this virus. I think this is only the first week. I mentioned it simply because the minutes that came out from Sage, the scientific body advising the government, saying that 801: of advising the government, saying that 80% of contacts need to be traced in 8096 of contacts need to be traced in order for 80% of contacts need to be traced in order for this system to be effective. If a third of the people are not handed over their contacts at all, you will not get anywhere near that, will you? We need to do better and I think in the first week that is encouraging, but I very much hope and I would expect that as we all get more used to it, then the new normal will start to apply and peopla will new normal will start to apply and people will see the advantage in peopla will see the advantage in sharing that people will see the advantage in sharing that information and doing the right thing, because cumulatively, as we found in lockdown, we can use this system to lockdown, we ran use this system to continue lockdown, we can use this system to continue the fight against the vims. continue the fight against the virus. Ross. Do you think there is a vims. Ross. Do you think there is a correlation virus. Ross. Do you think there is a correlation between the confidence in how the government has dealt with this pandemic, connecting that with the third that do not give any of their details with the track and trace? I love the fact he is calling you Rob as well. Thank you very much, a lot of people do. I think much, a lot of peopla do. I think that is an much, a lot of people do. I think that is an important point. He talked about confidence. Is he right? We have got to ask ourselves the question are people doing it because they do not want to cooperate, they value perhaps their own privacy? Or they have lost tmst? I own privacy? Or they have lost trust? I am dealing with the point. tmst? I am dealing with the point. I think trust? I am dealing with the point. I think there is still, actually, from all the evidence I am seeing a high degree... People are not doing it because the government are telling them to do it, people are telling them to do it, peopla are doing it telling them to do it, people are doing it because they know from their own information, research and understanding that it is the right thing to do. I never underestimated the sense of the Welsh public or the British public to do the right thing. You will always have a minority perhaps who will not, but the majority can be trusted. the majority ran be tmsted. Frankly, the majority can be trusted. Frankly, rather the majority can be trusted. Frankly, ratherthan the majority can be trusted. Frankly, rather than blind trust in Frankly, rather than blind tmst in government, Frankly, rather than blind trust in government, the government should be tmsting people government, the government should be trusting people to do the right trusting peopla to do the right thing. what trusting people to do the right thing. What would Dominic Cummings thing. what would Dominic Cummings do? Let’s thing. What would Dominic Cummings do? Let’s not talk about individuals now, let’s raise the level of the debate stop let me get around the rest of the palace. Bernadine, what do you think? I think there is a privacy issue and I think there is a trust issue. I agree with Ross. I trust issue. Iagree with Ross. I have not trust issue. I agree with Ross. I have not taken my lead from this government in terms of the pandemic. I went into lockdown some ten days before the government told me to because it was glaringly obvious to me that I should do. I might have saved my life, I don’t know. I was saved my life, I don’t know. Iwas “P saved my life, I don’t know. Iwas up around saved my life, I don’t know. I was up around London on the tube all the time. The week before I went into lockdown the tube was heaving. People are coughing and spluttering People are coughing and splutbering and sniffing, People are coughing and spluttering and sniffing, it was terrible. I do know peopla and sniffing, it was terrible. I do know people who continued to travel know peopla who continued to travel around know people who continued to travel around London who got the virus. I around London who got the vims. I did not around London who got the virus. I did not take around London who got the vims. I did not take my around London who got the virus. I did not take my leadership from this government. We know about Boris and him shaking hands with coronavirus him shaking hands with coronavims patients in him shaking hands with coronavirus patients in hospital when we all knew you should not be making physical contact with people. He did physical contact with peopla. He did later say physical contact with people. He did later say he was shaking hands with the staff. Well, that is what he said, that is what we perceived him to say. So that was his leadership. I think peopla to say. So that was his leadership. I think people are very suspicious. I think peopla are very suspicious. I think peopla I think people are very suspicious. I think people are making up their I think peopla are making up their own I think people are making up their own minds about what they are going to do and not listening to the government. We have to bring up Dominic Cummings, who I am sure is brought up a lot in this programme... He certainly was at the time. Look at his leadership skills, although he is the man behind the throne, the puppet master, but we know what he did. It is a very difficult situation, it is difficult for peopla. difficult situation, it is difficult for people. Who do you listen to? for peopla. who do you listen to? Testing is for people. who do you listen to? Testing is one for people. Who do you listen to? Testing is one thing, tracking is another, but it is the speed of result of the test which is important. I was desperate to get back to work when I was tested, but it took three days for my results to come back. I was desperate because I knew I was needed in work. But when you hear stories like getting your eyes tested by driving a certain amount of miles, and the lack of leadership. We are fortunate to have Vaughan Gething here. Yes, the majority of people might get their results, but I think for health care results, but I think for health rare workers results, but I think for health care workers the speed of reporting should be quicker. Not only that, the results and the statistics we the results and the statistis we look for, the results and the statistics we look for, we need to have those results quicker, we need to learn from Korea where the results come within a day. Then the track and testing process is much faster with isolation, so we needed to learn much quicker from isolation, so we needed to learn much quickerfrom Korea and other much quicker from Korea and other countries much quickerfrom Korea and other countries that have dealt with it, rather than wait for a lack of leadership. leadership. I am leadership. lam not leadership. I am not condemning what the Prime Minister was ‘s aided, or the other ingredients within the whole recipe of protecting people. I feel much safer with this to me to mla over feel much safer with this to me to rule over here, but then the lack of mle over here, but then the lack of PPE, and we rule over here, but then the lack of PPE, and we are hearing stories and the report coming out about ethnic minority doctors, why they are dying more than others. These are issues we need to have clear recommendations to make sure we are moving in the right direction. We need to protect each and every life that we can. Not need to protect each and every life that we can. Notjust doctors, all that we ran. Not just doctors, all health that we can. Notjust doctors, all health care staff. Rocco. It is very health rare staff. Rocco. It is very peculiar this health care staff. Rocco. It is very peculiar this virus and that it doesn’t affect everybody in the same way. The week before I worked cheek by way. The week before I worked cheek byjowt way. The week before I worked cheek by jowl with six way. The week before I worked cheek byjowl with six senior executives in my office because we were planning for the issues that we had to face. None of them got the disease. In my household which has 11 people and two children and we 11 peopla and two children and we are all 11 people and two children and we are all together in it, only four peopla got are all together in it, only four people got the disease. Why didn’t people got the disease. why didn’t the people got the disease. Why didn’t the others catch it? the others catch it? I think a lot of the modelling that is taking place is based on assumptions that are completely wrong. It is a new disease, of course. I know, yes, but 500,000 deaths are based on a computer model and false assumptions. I am computer model and false assumptions. lam not computer model and false assumptions. I am not sure that Niall Ferguson shares that view. I am not sure the same would have happened if we had locked down eartier happened if we had locked down earlier if the same assumptions were eartier if the same assumptions were put into the earlier if the same assumptions were put into the model. This illness has not been known to science for more than six months. We cannot say for certain how it will pan out. We are making the best assessments. This whole two metre distance is based principally on the Spanish flu, the principally on the Spanish ﬂu, the second principally on the Spanish flu, the second wave is based on the Spanish ﬂu. second wave is based on the Spanish ﬂu, a second wave is based on the Spanish flu, a completely different disease ﬂu, a completely different disease to this. flu, a completely different disease to this. The last two coronavirus is petered out on their own and that would happen with this one. That would be marvellous if that were the use. I would be marvellous if that were the use. lam would be marvellous if that were the case. I am not sure if there is use. I am not sure if there is certainty on case. I am not sure if there is certainty on that, but thank you. We are out of time. Our hour is up. Our audience tonight came from Cardiff. We are doing a special programme for the under 305 and no doubt they will have a lot of programme for the under 30s and no doubt they will have a lot of issues that affect their lives, the economy, jobs, housing, and the effects of coronavirus which will affect their features and everyone else’s. affect their features and everyone else’s. We are taking applications for that now, from across the UK. Apply in the usual way on the Question Time website. And don’t forget Plymouth. We would like to hear from forget Plymouth. We would like to hearfrom people forget Plymouth. We would like to hear from people there, forget Plymouth. We would like to hearfrom people there, whatever age hear from people there, whatever age you are. If you hearfrom people there, whatever age you are. If you want to carry on tonight was much discussion you can tonight was much discussion you ran join Five Live tonight was much discussion you can join Five Live right now for Question Time Extra Time. Thank you for Vaughan Question Time Extra Time. Thank you for Vaughanjoining us Dandelion and for Vaughan joining us Dandelion and to our for Vaughanjoining us Dandelion and to our audience from Cardiff. Lovely to see all of you. Thank you for watching Question Time.