Tonight, we are in Dundee. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Tom Tugendhat, a Conservative backbencher and influential chair of the foreign inﬂuential chair of the foreign select influential chair of the foreign select committee, a form of Lieutenant Colonel in the TA who served in a frank and if Dennis Tom. Ian Murray, currently the only labour Ian Murray, currently the only Labour MP in Scotland and candidate labour MP in Scotland and candidate to Labour MP in Scotland and candidate to become deputy leader. The SNP’s justice and home affairs spokesperson at Westminster, 3 spokesperson at Westminster, a trained lawyer, she led the legal challenge in Scotland to Boris johnson’s challenge in Scotland to Boris Johnson’s decision to prorogue Parliament and she won, Joanna Partiament and she won, joanna Cherry. Alex Parliament and she won, Joanna Cherry. Alex Massie, journalist, Times, Liszt and Scotland editor of the Spectator. And for three decades one of the country’s best loved one of the countrrs best loved crime one of the country’s best loved crime writers and dedicated Raith Rovers supporter, Val McDermid. Welcome to our panel, to you at home and to the audience here and, as usual, our and to the audience here and, as usual, ouraudience and to the audience here and, as usual, our audience has been selected to reflect the current selected to reﬂect the current political selected to reflect the current political picture in Scotland, so that means there are more SNP than Conservative or Labour supporters Conservative or labour supporters plus a smaller Conservative or Labour supporters plus a smaller number from other parties, and I look forward to hearing from all of you, but you at home ran join hearing from all of you, but you at home ranjoin in hearing from all of you, but you at home canjoin in the hearing from all of you, but you at home can join in the conversation on home ranjoin in the conversation on social home can join in the conversation on social media. Let’s have our first question, which is from Chris Marks. Evening. Was Sajid Javid right to Evening. Was Sajid javid right to resign as Evening. Was Sajid Javid right to resign as Chancellor today? A bit of a shock, wasn’t it? Very much so. Would you have resigned in those circumstances? I think anybody who works in politics knows that it is a works in politis knows that it is a team game. works in politics knows that it is a team game. You rely on the team you work with to give you honest advice. You built up a team slowly over years and you trust people you work years and you trust peopla you work with, and so, years and you trust people you work with, and so, if you can’t keep your team, then it does make your ability to conduct business that you feel you have to do very difficult. So I totally understand him. So Sajid javid totally understand him. So Sajid Javid resigned. He said he felt he javid resigned. He said he felt he had no Javid resigned. He said he felt he had no choice but to take the decision he did, because his team of special advisers, decision he did, because his team of specialadvisers, he decision he did, because his team of special advisers, he was being told his team special advisers had to go if he was going to carry on, and he would have to use advisers from Number Ten, would have to use advisers from NumberTen, I understand it. would have to use advisers from Number Ten, I understand it. Was he put in a position where he had no choice? Is that what Boris put in a position where he had no choice? Is that what BorisJohnson choice? Is that what Boris johnson wanted, do choice? Is that what BorisJohnson wanted, do you think? Is it effectively constructive dismissal? Or is it what Dominic Cummings wanted? This is not the first time there have been disagreements between numbers ten and 11. It only been Chancellor for eight months and had never delivered a Budget. I think any government, a new Prime Minister, especially one who has just won a large majority, has the right to have the team around them that they want, and part of that team is fundamentally down to the advisers who make up the team. So I understand Number Ten’s desire to stamp its authority at this stage. I think Surjit Shavit has behaved with integrity and been loyal to his team, and so I have a lot of respect for his decision. —— Sajid Javid has for his decision. -- Sajid javid has behaved for his decision. —— Sajid Javid has behaved with integrity. He was right to resign and he’s come up in my estimation today for doing that. I have only been in politics for five have only been in politic for five years but I’ve have only been in politics for five years but I’ve learned it’s absolutely vital to have advisers and staff around you that you can and staff around you that you ran tmst. It’s and staff around you that you can trust. It’s not unheard of in tmst. It’s not unheard of in politic for trust. It’s not unheard of in politics for people to be surrounded politic for peopla to be surrounded by advisers politics for people to be surrounded by advisers and staff that they can’t trust. Clearly, Sajid Javid can’t tmst. Clearty, Sajid javid had a can’t trust. Clearly, Sajid Javid had a team that he felt he could put his trust in, and that was going to be taken away from him, and he would have put round him people chosen by have put round him peopla chosen by Boris johnson have put round him people chosen by BorisJohnson or, should I say, Boris johnson or, should I say, probably by BorisJohnson or, should I say, probably by Dominic Cummings, who seems to be pulling the strings in this government. 50 seems to be pulling the strings in this government. Sol seems to be pulling the strings in this government. 50 I think he was this government. So I think he was right to resign. I this government. 50 I think he was right to resign. I applaud him for doing so. I suspect that Boris johnson doing so. I suspect that Boris Johnson thought he could get away johnson thought he could get away with this, Johnson thought he could get away with this, and that Sajid Javid wouldn’t resign, and that’s why I 55V wouldn’t resign, and that’s why I say that Mr wouldn’t resign, and that’s why I say that MrJavid has gone up in my estimation. APPLAUSE Alex, what does this tell us, if Max, what does this tell us, if anything, Alex, what does this tell us, if anything, about the kind of government that we should expect? It’s one of the interesting questions arising from the reshuffle, because Boris questions arising from the reshuffle, because BorisJohnson was reshufﬂa, because Boris johnson was eluted reshuffle, because BorisJohnson was elected on a mandate to get Brexit eluted on a mandate to get Brexit done elected on a mandate to get Brexit done one way or another, and then to change the subject from Brexit to talk about just about anything else. But it is still not clear what the purpose of this government actually is. what purpose of this government actually is. What does it believe in beyond is. what does it believe in beyond Boris is. What does it believe in beyond BorisJohnson himself? I think we Boris johnson himself? I think we ran say it BorisJohnson himself? I think we can say it does believe in that! ran say it does believe in that! What ran say it does believe in that! what is can say it does believe in that! What is it actually for? What is its what is it actually for? what is its vision for What is it actually for? What is its vision for the country? There is a lot of talk about levelling up and one—nation Conservatism, but even one-nation Conservatism, but even respected to one—nation Conservatism, but even respected to that, what one nation are you talking about? —— restricted are you talking about? -- restricted to that. Are you are you talking about? —— restricted to that. Are you talking about the UK as a whole, because it doesn’t always look like that from Scotland or Northern Ireland, where always look like that from Scotland or Northern Ireland, whereJulian or Northern Ireland, where julian Smith or Northern Ireland, wherejulian Smith was sacked as or Northern Ireland, whereJulian Smith was sacked as Northern Ireland Secretary, presumably for being rather good at his job and for declaring last year that a no—deal declaring last year that a no-deal Brexit declaring last year that a no—deal Brexit would be suboptimal. His sacking, in some ways, is as significant Sajid Javid’s, because significant Sajid javid’s, because it significant Sajid Javid’s, because it demonstrates the extent to which Number Ten will insist on absolute personal loyalty, I think, Number Ten will insist on absolute personal loyalty, Ithink, to Number Ten will insist on absolute personal loyalty, I think, to this personal loyalty, Ithink, to this Prime personal loyalty, I think, to this Prime ministerial team, and it will do so by trying to fuse the Treasury, numbers ten and 11 Downing St, together in ways that other prime ministers have been tempted to achieve but none have ever managed to make work, and so... But you think about the early years of Blair think about the earty years of Blair and Brown, think about the early years of Blair and Brown, and it all fell apart a bit towards the end, and Cameron and Osborne, that’s exactly what they did. Yes, but they had worked together in opposition and arrived in government with an idea of what they wanted to do. Boris in government with an idea of what they wanted to do. BorisJohnson they wanted to do. Boris johnson doesn’t they wanted to do. BorisJohnson doesn’t have any comrades or close colleagues that he can have that colleagues that he ran have that sort of colleagues that he can have that sort of personal relationship. He is a bit of a loner with few close a bit of a loner with few dose political a bit of a loner with few close political allies, and he is now having to mn political allies, and he is now having to run a different type of administration to those of Blair and Brown and Cameron and Osborne, who arrived in Downing Street with a dear arrived in Downing Street with a clear notion of what they wanted to dear notion of what they wanted to do, whether clear notion of what they wanted to do, whether people agreed or not. do, whether peopla agreed or not. johnson do, whether people agreed or not. Johnson doesn’t have that, and we johnson doesn’t have that, and we are no Johnson doesn’t have that, and we are no clearer after the reshuffle are no dearer after the reshufﬂa in terms are no clearer after the reshuffle in terms of discovering what it is he wants to do and why. The man in the blue sweater. Unbelievable, really, that the Chancellor has only been in position for a few months and hasn’t even delivered a Budget, and it looks to me as if Dominic Cummings is the man who is dominating proceedings. Is senior political adviser. You only speculate. We should try and get Dominic Cummings on here one day. with Dominic Cummings on here one day. With house prices in London sky with house prices in London sky high, might With house prices in London sky high, might Boris With house prices in London sky high, might BorisJohnson be best high, might Boris johnson be best chucking the high, might BorisJohnson be best chucking the chancel out, knocking down the walls and having some extra foot for himself? We saw he just took a holiday with £15,000 and we don’t know where the money came from, so let’s put that to the panel. Is Boris from, so let’s put that to the panel. Is BorisJohnson from, so let’s put that to the panel. Is BorisJohnsonjust from, so let’s put that to the panel. Is BorisJohnson just trying panel. Is Boris johnson just trying to do an panel. Is BorisJohnsonjust trying to do an impression of Donald Trump to do an impression of Donald Tmmp and sacking to do an impression of Donald Trump and sacking anybody who disagrees with him? APPLAUSE Picking up that point, he is a relatively new Prime Minister and he’s got a massive majority. Why shouldn’t he decide who he wants and who he doesn’t? I think there is something to be said for that. For Sajid javid, I something to be said for that. For Sajid Javid, I think it was a difficult decision, and you build your team around people you trust your team around peopla you trust and you are your team around people you trust and you are told, that what is going, you get what you are given. It must be a difficult decision at that point to say, do I stick with it and stay inside the tent or do I go with my principles and leave good go with my principlas and leave good on him go with my principles and leave good on him for doing that. He had to lose an adviser earlier on, who was lose an adviser eartier on, who was apparently lose an adviser earlier on, who was apparently frogmarched out of Downing Street. Which is not how you Downing Street. which is not how you treat people, Downing Street. Which is not how you treat people, to be honest. What we treat people, to be honest. what we are seeing treat people, to be honest. What we are seeing speaks to be off one of two things, it’s either a hallmark of profound insecurity, you can’t stand the opposition because it stand the opposition berause it makes you stand the opposition because it makes you feel insecure about yourself and your position, or it smacks of dictatorship, you will not be told, you will not have opposition, you are doing what you want to do and, as Alex says, don’t know what that is, and that is worrying. worrying. Liz Truss is now the worrying. Liz Tmss is now the longest worrying. Liz Truss is now the longest serving member of the government, and that is interesting, and it’s not something that people and it’s not something that peopla would and it’s not something that people would have predicted or thought plausible six months ago. In terms of Sajid javid plausible six months ago. In terms of Sajid Javid and exactly what went of Sajid javid and exactly what went on today, he of Sajid Javid and exactly what went on today, he walked in all smiles to Number Ten and didn’t look quite as happy when he came out. Would you have made the same decision? Absolutely, John is right, the Absolutely, john is right, the unsung Absolutely, John is right, the unsung heroes of politics are your unsung heroes of politic are your team, who unsung heroes of politics are your team, who work hard for little reward, who built up that loyalty over time, and reward, who built up that loyalty overtime, and I reward, who built up that loyalty over time, and I couldn’t do the reward, who built up that loyalty over time, and I couldn’t do thejob over time, and I couldn’t do the job I do over time, and I couldn’t do thejob I do without them. It must be difficult in government and, if you lose that team to somebody who is the de facto Prime Minister, an unelected official, you have to make unelacted official, you have to make the unelected official, you have to make the decision to go. Sajid Javid has the decision to go. Sajid javid has been in the decision to go. Sajid Javid has been in the the decision to go. Sajid Javid has been in thejob the decision to go. Sajid Javid has been in the job for seven months and I don’t think the Prime Minister woke up this morning thinking he would lose his Chancellor, and the only accomplishment he has got to his name is a 50p coin with Brexit on the back. Surely the government would not be taking forward the sacking of the Chancellor in those circumstances? But it sacking of the Chancellor in those circumstances? But it highlights a bigger issue, which is that a government that is running out of government that is mnning out of control, government that is running out of control, with a large majority in partiament, control, with a large majority in parliament, which can’t be held to partiament, which can’t be held to account. parliament, which can’t be held to account. Joanna and I did the case account. joanna and I did the use that beat account. Joanna and I did the case that beat the government prorogation, now they are out for judges. They have banned journalists from lobby at Number Ten, they are trying to undermine civil circuits. I think this is something that has to be resolved, and characters like Dominic Cummings are running the Dominic Cummings are mnning the show, and I Dominic Cummings are running the show, and I think it is the de facto Prime Minister, and that’s not good for democracy. In the front here. You could argue that the behaviour we are witnessing is the classic behaviour of a bully. Right, we are witnessing is the classic behaviour ofa bully. Right, 0K. we are witnessing is the classic behaviour ofa bully. Right, OK. I am not sure what behaviour ofa bully. Right, OK. I am not sure whatJohnson would say am not sure whatjohnson would say about am not sure whatJohnson would say about that. I think today’s reshuffle is a perfect demonstration reshufﬂe is a perfect demonstration that it is reshuffle is a perfect demonstration that it is all about self—interest that it is all about self-interest and that it is all about self—interest and showmanship for Boris that it is all about self—interest and showmanship for Borisjohnson, and showmanship for Boris johnson, and it has and showmanship for Borisjohnson, and it has not been a concise, strategic plan. The reshuffle was strategic plan. The reshufﬂa was done by a strategic plan. The reshuffle was done by a maverick, ad hoc. It was certainly a surprise, I think we can certainly a surprise, I think we ran all agree on that. certainly a surprise, I think we can all agree on that. Let’s move on to another question reflecting something a lot of have been asking. Andrew Connelly first in light of the Brexit vote, is it right that Scotland should be denied a second referendum? Quite a bit on this. What referendum? Quite a bit on this. what a referendum? Quite a bit on this. What a surprise! Ian, kicked us off. what a surprise! Ian, kicked us off. I principally What a surprise! Ian, kicked us off. I principally don’t think there is a mandate for it, and I have always taken a principled view, and I look taken a principlod view, and I look forward taken a principled view, and I look forward to listening to what you have to say on this issue in the audience this evening, but I have always taken the principled position always taken the principlad position that it always taken the principled position thatitis always taken the principled position that it is in Scotland’s best interest to be a member of the UK, and in the UK’s best interest for that. Brexit will be bad, we don’t know what will happen in the next 11 months we just had our fingers crossed that things will work out. I don’t think they will, but that’s a different question. To have Scottish independence on top of that, in my view, would be the equivalent of cutting your nose up to spite your face, and I think we need some answers to those questions. 50 face, and I think we need some answers to those questions. So why is jeremy answers to those questions. So why is Jeremy Corbyn answers to those questions. So why isJeremy Corbyn saying, if people is jeremy Corbyn saying, if peopla wanted isJeremy Corbyn saying, if people wanted a referendum, he wouldn’t stand in their way? wanted a referendum, he wouldn’t stand in theirway? I wanted a referendum, he wouldn’t stand in their way? I thought he was wrong, we are an internationalist party agreeing with solidarity and, if you disagree with the ends, you should disagree with the means. The last politician to disagree with the ends but facilitate the means was David Cameron, and look what happens. We have to listen to each other and respect each other’s opinions, other and respect each other’s opinions, and there will be people opinions, and there will be peopla in opinions, and there will be people in the audience and across the country who think we should have a second independence referendum tomorrow, but I think it would be bad for Scotland’s interests in the UK and the world, and we need to get onto two big things, trying to deal with the issue of public services in Scotland, which have got worse for the last ten years, and secondly, let’s have the big questions asked. I want a positive discussion about why the UK is good for Scotland, and I also want to be able to exploit my independence. Let’s have that debate rather than talking about the process of whether to have a second referendum. Maybe we’ll hear tonight what the currency would be, the border at Berwick, all of the wrong—headed arguments we put in wrong-headed arguments we put in studios wrong—headed arguments we put in studios like this are exactly the same as the ones on Scottish independence, and we have to have that debate. that debate. I’m going to start by quoting back at Ian his own words when he supported a second EU referendum when he said, when circumstances change, people should circumstances change, peopla should be circumstances change, people should be allowed a second vote. Ian is saying that was not his quote, let’s be clear. Did you agree with it? The 8th of April 2019 in the Commons, you said that. You said you were paraphrasing somebody else, but that’s what you said. When central circumstances change, people should circumstances change, peopla should be circumstances change, people should be allowed a second vote. I know you were talking about exit, but I’m saying the same principle can apply saying the same principla ran apply to saying the same principle can apply to Scottish independence. In 2014, when people in Scotland voted to when peopla in Scotland voted to stay in the when people in Scotland voted to stay in the UK, it was a very different UK they were voting to stay in. One of the central premises of the Better Together campaign was that the way to preserve your EU citizenship was to vote to remain part of the UK, and that is now no longer the use, part of the UK, and that is now no longer the case, and we are also longer the use, and we are also faced longer the case, and we are also faced with the most right—wing government we have seen in modern times, which Scotland overwhelmingly did not vote for. And I believe that there is a mandate. The SNP, which supports independence and a second referendum, keeps winning elections in Scotland, Ian, we won the last elaction in Scotland, Ian, we won the last election pretty impressively with 4595 election pretty impressively with 45% of the vote and over 80% of the 4596 of the vote and over 8096 of the seats. In the Scottish parliament, our democratically elected body for Scotland has voted to hold a second independence referendum and the polling suggests the majority of peopla polling suggests the majority of people now want a second independence referendum. This is within the margin of error. The last three polls have shown a majority in favour of independence but yes, they are close. They are within a margin of error so they are not as strong as you would like them to be. Bearing this in mind, when we started the independence referendum campaign in 2012, we started at 28% campaign in 2012, we started at 2896 and went campaign in 2012, we started at 28% and went to 45%. Some people we went and went to 4596. Some people we went “P and went to 4596. Some people we went up to above 50 and went to 45%. Some people we went up to above 50 and then fell back but we will never be sure. Lets cut to the chase. We want to start at 5011, to the chase. We want to start at 50%, that’s to the chase. We want to start at 5096, that’s a to the chase. We want to start at 50%, that’s a pretty solid starting 5096, that’s a pretty solid starting point. what 50%, that’s a pretty solid starting point. What would you like to point. what would you like to happen? point. What would you like to happen? We have Nicola Sturgeon, who is requesting permission, effectively, from the Prime Minister to be able to hold a second independence referendum and you want to go further. I want to be perfectly clear that I have never advocated a wildcat, or what some peopla all an advocated a wildcat, or what some people call an illegal referendum. people all an illegal referendum. It people call an illegal referendum. It would be rather surprising I did so given I am a senior member of the legal profession and devoted a large part of last year to defeating Boris johnson in part of last year to defeating Boris Johnson in court for doing something johnson in court for doing something unlawful. Johnson in court for doing something unlawful. However, the weight of legal opinion is that it is by no means certain that the Scottish partiament means certain that the Scottish parliament doesn’t have the competence to hold a referendum, so I agree we should be making sure that the referendum is properly constituted and lawful, but I also agree with Nicole Sturgeon, my party agree with Nicola Sturgeon, my party leader, that the weight of legal opinion is that it’s not clear the Scottish parliament doesn’t have the Scottish partiament doesn’t have the power to pass Scottish parliament doesn’t have the power to pass a bill to hold a referendum. As Nicola has said, it’ll be interesting to that tested. MY it’ll be interesting to that tested. My point is that I don’t think the Scottish electorate should be at the mercy of Boris Scottish electorate should be at the mercy of BorisJohnson’s say so. mercy of Boris johnson’s say so. Boris mercy of BorisJohnson’s say so. BorisJohnson is a man with a Boris johnson is a man with a cavalier BorisJohnson is a man with a cavalier attitude towards democracy. As we saw last year, a cavalier attitude towards the rule of law. 50 attitude towards the ml; of law. So I am attitude towards the rule of law. 50 I am interested in finding ways in which Scotland can hold a lawful referendum. But I am more interested in creating the vision and the arguments that will win that referendum. I think it is important, to answer Ian’s point, he is simply wrong to say that the Scottish Government runs poorer public services. The facts and figures simply don’t hear that out. I’m happy to go that later. It is also possibla to happy to go that later. It is also possible to deal with constitutional possibla to deal with constitutional issues possible to deal with constitutional issues and run the country at the issues and nm the country at the same issues and run the country at the same time. That happens in lots of countries. Lets go back to the audience. I gave you a countries. Lets go back to the audience. I gave you along countries. Lets go back to the audience. I gave you a long time to talk there. Lots of people want to talk there. Lots of peopla want to cut in. The talk there. Lots of people want to cut in. The man with the glasses. UC you are going to be having an advisory independence referendum. advisory independence referendum. I will go round the audience in a bit. will go round the audience in a hit. As the only remaining Labour MP in As the only remaining labour MP in Scotland, Ian As the only remaining Labour MP in Scotland, Ian Murray must see that his party has to change their stance on the independence referendum issue if they want to re—engage with the Scottish electorate. And in the Graeme White T—shirt? —— the grey Graeme white T-shirt? -- the grey and white Graeme White T—shirt? —— the grey and white T—shirt. You said the SNP and white T-shirt. You said the SNP only got 4596 of and white T—shirt. You said the SNP only got 45% of the vote but I know only got 4596 of the vote but I know loads of only got 45% of the vote but I know loads of people who would vote for independents who didn’t vote for the SNP. The woman in the purple top. I SNP. The woman in the purpla top. I fear that SNP. The woman in the purple top. I fear that Brexit has become a convenient fuel to reignite the independence fire, and I think what Scotland needs to hear is what the economic arguments are for or against independence. against independence. Tom, Brexit is the fuel to the independence fire. Is this going to lie at Boris johnson’s Is this going to lie at Boris Johnson’s door? I got into politics johnson’s door? I got into politic for a simple Johnson’s door? I got into politics for a simple reason, to serve our communities and improve the lives of the people we are lucky enough to share these islands with. When I share these islands with. when I look share these islands with. When I look around the country and I see the stmgglos look around the country and I see the struggles that we are having in the stmgglas that we are having in making sure the struggles that we are having in making sure the health service runs well and that schools are delivering the results we want to see for our kids. When I look at the infrastructure investments we need infrastmcture investments we need to see, infrastructure investments we need to see, whether it’s the Queensferry Bridge or any other improvements we need to get, and I see another argument about a constitutional change that is going to distract politicians from serving people, politicians from sewing peopla, from sewing politicians from serving people, from serving what we really need, from sewing what we really need, reducing from serving what we really need, reducing waiting times, treating cancer, educating kids, building the economy, and I see instead another argument about whether or not we should split up our country, I have to say I find it very sad. And I find it very sad because this is not an economic argument for me. This is not an argument as to whether Scotland is big enough or too small or whether England would be better or worse without Scotland. For me, this is a fundamental argument about who we are as a people. When I look who we are as a peoplo. when I look around who we are as a people. When I look around these islands, I am not a foreigner in Dundee. This is our country and we share it together. I feel incredibly sad when people talk feel incredibly sad when peopla talk in a way that feel incredibly sad when people talk in a way that splits us and divide us. I know politicians of all sides do this, so it’s not a partisan point, but do this, so it’s not a partisan point, butl do this, so it’s not a partisan point, but I find it deeply sad when actually these islands have done an amazing thing over the last 300 years and achieved some fantastic results. Yes, we have had some mistakes too, but we have really brought an awful lot to the world. We have been a fantastic force for good over many years. And I think it’s a real sadness to see that perhaps being thrown away. To pick “P perhaps being thrown away. To pick up that point from the woman there, do you think any of the blame for this lies with Boris do you think any of the blame for this lies with BorisJohnson for this lies with Boris johnson for pushing this lies with BorisJohnson for pushing Brexit when Scotland voted overwhelmingly to remain? We know from the last referendum in 2014 that the settled will of the Scottish people at the time was Scottish peopla at the time was clear. I Scottish people at the time was clear. I am Scottish people at the time was clear. lam not Scottish people at the time was clear. I am not in a position... Scottish people at the time was clear. lam not in a position... I dear. lam not in a position... I represent a clear. lam not in a position... I represent a fantastic community in Kent, and it’s not for me to tell the peopla Kent, and it’s not for me to tell the people living here in this wonderful part of the United Kingdom on how they should vote or what they should do, but I listen to those peopla who should do, but I listen to those people who led the referendum on both sides and I heard pretty dearty both sides and I heard pretty clearly that it was a decision for a dearty that it was a decision for a generation. clearly that it was a decision for a generation. And five years isn’t a generation. Alex? Tom has done his best to dodge your question, Fiona. Did you all spot that, folks? He has done so very eloquently and elegantly. The answer to the question is that yes of course, Brexit is at the heart of this. If it were not for Brexit then we would not be talking about this issue because Brexit has put it back on the table. If you are an SNP the tabla. If you are an SNP supporter, it the table. If you are an SNP supporter, it has put it back on the table in ways that are reasonable table in ways that are reasonabla and table in ways that are reasonable and persuasive and it makes for the kind of material change in circumstance that would justify a second referendum. So from their point of view, yes of course it is perfectly appropriate to seek another referendum right now. Counter to that is also perfectly respectable and persuasive, which is respectabla and persuasive, which is that respectable and persuasive, which is that five years is not a very long time. And although Brexit may or may not prove to be a terrible blunder, or perhaps a great success, who knows! It is not long enough to justify revisiting a question that everybody promised at the time would be respected for years to come. So you are talking about competing claims of legitimacy. At present, and this may of course change, and it is on the anti—referendum side it is on the anti-referendum side that has it is on the anti—referendum side that has the ascendancy. The SNP win plenty that has the ascendancy. The SNP win planty of that has the ascendancy. The SNP win plenty of handsome election victories, but it’s worth bearing in mind the calibre of the people they beat! But that itself is not enough because general elections are about a lot of different issues will stop but when you actually ask people, but when you actually ask peopla, should but when you actually ask people, should there be an independence referendum on the timetable notionally favoured by Nicola Sturgeon, that is to say this year before the Holyrood elections next year, most people say there should not. The most recent YouGov poll on this specific question show 30% of this specific question show 3096 of the this specific question show 30% of the SNP’s own supporters say there should not be a timetable like that. should not be a timetabla like that. That’s why the should not be a timetable like that. That’s why the UK Government can get That’s why the UK Government ran get away with That’s why the UK Government can get away with saying no for the moment. After the 2021 Holyrood elections, depending on the results, the line could change, but it will hold for now because most people in Scotland now because most peopla in Scotland do not now because most people in Scotland do not want a referendum. If 80% in do not want a referendum. If 8096 in Scotland do not want a referendum. If 80% in Scotland wanted a referendum than it would happen but as long as the country is evenly divided then it won’t. Good evening. I would like to ask why the SNP think that Scotland would be better tied to France, Germany and desires to separate us from England, Wales and Ireland as a from England, Walas and Ireland as a group. why do from England, Wales and Ireland as a group. Why do you think we would be group. why do you think we would be better off group. Why do you think we would be better off tied to Germany and France? That’s not what we think. We think Scotland would be better off as a member of the European Union. We also think England would be better off as member of the European Union. It’s my dearest wish to see England come back to the EU and sit at the top table alongside an independent Scotland. What you are independent Scotland. what you are dearty asking independent Scotland. What you are clearly asking is why do you want to dearty asking is why do you want to separate from clearly asking is why do you want to separate from the rest of the UK when you want to join the EU. We when you want tojoin the EU. We don’t when you want to join the EU. We don’t want to separate from the rest of the UK... New kind of implied that though. You want to stay part of the UK? No, we want to exercise our right to self—determination and our right to self-determination and become our right to self—determination and become an independent country. That doesn’t have to involve separation. We are not leaving something to stop the United Kingdom is a union of two nations, Scotland and England. And the Welsh and the Northern Irish? The act of Union was a union between Scotland and England. If Scotland wishes to withdraw from that union then there will no longer be United Kingdom in a way we understand. So you will have left. The reason we want to remain part of the EU is we see Scotland’s future in the EU. Otherwise Scotland’s future is tied to England, completely at the whim of what English voters choose. And that cannot be right. I wish you would stop interrupting me. A union cannot be a hostage situation. And that is rapidly what this union is becoming because Scotland is facing board is being set up on either side of our country, a border with Northern Ireland thanks to the agreement that has been reached, and a border with the European Union. Why a border with the European Union. why do you a border with the European Union. Why do you prefer the European why do you prefer the European Union, that Why do you prefer the European Union, that is the question. We prefer it because the EU is a union of equals. In the EU, if a small country like Ireland has concerns then those concerns are heard with as much weight at the top table as the concerns of France or Germany. We saw that in the Brexit process will stop contrast that with the way Scotland was treated during the Brexit process when none of our concerns were taken on board. 50 we concerns were taken on board. So we prefer a union of concerns were taken on board. 50 we prefer a union of equals as opposed to a union of unequal is. Many peopla don’t to a union of unequal is. Many people don’t see this as a hostage situation. APPLAUSE INAUDIBLE On that last point, it is not a binary, it is not to be either part of the UK or the EU. First of all, what we have to do, if we so choose, the people of Scotland, if we decide to become an independent nation, then at that point we decide whether or not being part of the European Union is what is in our best interest. I am a passionate interest. lam a passionate Europhile interest. I am a passionate Europhile and right now I would love us to be back in the EU. But that by the time we gain independence which might be next year, a few years down the road, whenever, it might not be the next best option. It’s not an either or decision. It’s about Scotland making decisions for itself as an independent nation to stop and to ask Ian, what would a mandate look like? To answer that question directly, a mandate does not look like 4596, as directly, a mandate does not look like 45%, as we had on December 12. like 4596, as we had on December 12. john Curtice, the like 45%, as we had on December 12. John Curtice, the UK’s most eminent john Curtice, the UK’s most eminent pollster, said John Curtice, the UK’s most eminent pollster, said you couldn’t extrapolate a mandate from December 12. A mandate according to Nicola Sturgeon 18 12. A mandate according to Nicole Sturgeon 18 months ago 12. A mandate according to Nicola Sturgeon 18 months ago was consistent at 60% in the polls. What consistent at 6096 in the polls. what is consistent at 60% in the polls. What is remarkable in this whole debate is remarkabla in this whola debate is that is remarkable in this whole debate is that the SNP have existed for nearty 70 or is that the SNP have existed for nearly 70 or 80 years and still hearty 70 or 80 years and still can’t nearly 70 or 80 years and still can’t answer that Lady’s question can’t answer that ladrs question and can’t answer that [5de question and still can’t answer that Lady’s question and still can’t answer questions about currency and questions about borders and questions about how we fulfil the deficit. We can sit and fulfil the deficit. We ran sit and talk fulfil the deficit. We can sit and talk about mandates but when will you get onto the big issues about what would we need to do and the arguments around what you want to see. ALL TALK AT ONCE Hang on! You two are having a private conversation of a stop it is fascinating but there are a lot of us that need to hear what’s going on. You are talking about opinion polls and I’m talking about the mandates of when people go to the ballot box. of when peopla go to the ballot box. 4595 of when peopla go to the ballot box. 4596 isn’t of when people go to the ballot box. 45% isn’t a mandate. It is a mandate. The authority of MSPs is surely a mandate. There are lots of hands up... Thank you. There are lots of hands up and let’s hear from somebody. In the red T—shirt at the somebody. In the red T-shirt at the front. Currency somebody. In the red T—shirt at the front. Currency and borders, Scotland voted twice to stay in the EU and avoid borders, and if England voted to leave, borders are on England’s fault, not Scotland’s. We have a functional economy and we can have a functional economy and we ran have our have a functional economy and we can have our own country if we choose to have one, but when it comes to the union, it doesn’t matter. You will have a functioning currency. It’s not hard to figure out. If there is one thing we have learnt from the Brexit process is that division doesn’t dry progress. We have been told now independence, and it’s time to stop debating it, and we need to solve hydro deaths and other things, because we need to discuss these things instead of independence. The man in the T—shirt. man in the T—shirt. Actually, sorry, man in the T-shirt. Actually, sorry, the young man man in the T—shirt. Actually, sorry, the young man behind you. I think it’s quite rich it’s quite rich to have, before Brexit, a lot of people said, we need another referendum on the EU, but they said with the same phase, we can’t have another referendum on Scottish independence. That’s why the second EU referendum was a stupid idea, from a Scottish perspective. We are basically at the whim of the English Parliament, so will they abstain from any boats that just will they abstain from any boats thatjust involve will they abstain from any boats that just involve the will they abstain from any boats thatjust involve the English? Say that just involve the English? Say that again? thatjust involve the English? Say that again? The SNP say they are at the whim of the English Parliament, the whim of the English Partiament, but they take the whim of the English Parliament, but they take part in votes which only concern legislation in England. only concern lagislation in England. English votes only concern legislation in England. English votes for English laws? It is a UK Parliament. The woman with is a UK Partiament. The woman with the blonde is a UK Parliament. The woman with the blonde hair. the blonde hair. That Scotland voted to stay in in 2014 is very different to now, but until Brexit is done, and we know what UK we are staying in? Surely we need to wait and see what happens and then possibly consider allowing another red independence —— independence referendum. I think it’s rich to claim that you don’t want to leave because of borders, when that wasn’t the rase because of borders, when that wasn’t the case with the EU. We have not the use with the EU. We have not negotiated a the case with the EU. We have not negotiated a deal yet. It hasn’t been approved and ratified through both parliaments. But we deserve both partiaments. But we deserve answers both parliaments. But we deserve answers to those questions and we didn’t get them. didn’t get them. The woman in the black sweater. When I was at school, black sweater. when I was at school, 4595 black sweater. When I was at school, 45% meant there was 55% on the other 4596 meant there was 5596 on the other side, and 45% meant there was 55% on the other side, and 55% of voters voted not side, and 5596 of voters voted not for the SNP, side, and 55% of voters voted not for the SNP, so surely that does not give them a mandate. Because there is a percentage of don’t knows, so that might not have applied at school, I don’t know. At the heart of this is a question of how you think about Scotland’s future and how you feel about it. At the moment, in terms of cost benefit analysis, unionism has the upper hand in terms of financial, technical and practical aspects of independence that have been made complicated and made more difficult by Brexit but, in terms of how you feel, the calculation is changing feel, the ralmlation is changing there feel, the calculation is changing there as well. I think it seems to me there that the SNP and pro—independence forces have the pro-independence forces have the upper hand, pro—independence forces have the upper hand, and opinion polling demonstrates that. If you look at the views of people under the age of 50. the views of people under the age of 50, .60, 65% now saying they support 50, .60, 6596 now saying they support independence, 50, .60, 65% now saying they support independence, and that’s getting quite close to the settled will of the Scottish people —type territory. the Scottish peopla -type territory. The the Scottish people -type territory. The problem the Scottish people —type territory. The problem for unionism is that the 9’P The problem for unionism is that the gap on what you think, the hard—headed calculation, has been hard-headed ralmlation, has been narrowing, hard—headed calculation, has been narrowing, while the gap on the how narrowing, whila the gap on the how do you feel has narrowing, while the gap on the how do you feel has been widening, and in neither case is the direction of in neither use is the direction of travel working in neither case is the direction of travel working in unionism’s favour. Unless it finds ways to address that, unionism has a long—term that, unionism has a long-term problam, a that, unionism has a long—term problem, a medium—term problem and problam, a medium-term problem and quite possibly a problem, a medium—term problem and quite possibly a problem as well. Has your position change on this in terms of the head versus the heart? I swivelled for a long time, on the one hand, on the other hand, and you ask questions and neither side could give me a coherent answer. Really, the basis on which I made my decision then, and I think it’s the same now, is I looked at what the Scottish Parliament, not same now, is I looked at what the Scottish Parliament, notjust the Scottish Partiament, not just the SNP at Scottish Parliament, notjust the SNP at the Parliament in Scotland SNP at the Partiament in Scotland had SNP at the Parliament in Scotland had done since Holyrood began in 1999, and I looked at what Westminster had done in that same time period, and I knew where my heart lay and it was the same place as my head laid, that what was best for the people of Scotland, they for the peopla of Scotland, they have for the people of Scotland, they have been better served by what has been done in their Parliament and been done in their Partiament and the country as been done in their Parliament and the country as a whole, and that was the basis on which I made my decision. APPLAUSE APPMUSE I APPLAUSE I have a feeling this is a topic we will be discussing for quite some time, actually, over the next months, years? I have no idea. We will find out. Let me months, years? I have no idea. We will find out. Let me tell you where we will be next week. We will be in Weymouth with the chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland, and commentator and former cabinet minister and all—round train geek minister and all-round train geek Michael minister and all—round train geek Michael Portillo. After that, we will be in Middlesbrough, so if will be in Middlasbrough, so if you’d like to will be in Middlesbrough, so if you’d like to be in the audience, all us or go to you’d like to be in the audience, callus or go to the Question Time all us or go to the Question Time website callus or go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions. Come and join us. We’d love to have website and follow the instructions. Come and join us. We’d love to have you in the audience. I will move on, because we had a lot of questions, and it surprisingly, on this next issue. Tracey Colville, where are you? Is a bridge to Ireland a bridge too far? LAUGHTER Well, Ian? It’s a great MUGHTER Well, Ian? It’s a great question, and is this another one of Boris’s fantasy and is this another one of Boris’s fantasy projects, like the island airport and everything else he has come out airport and everything else he has come outwith? He mentioned this come out with? He mentioned this eartier come outwith? He mentioned this earlier this week, in terms of H52, eartier this week, in terms of H52, but what earlier this week, in terms of H52, but what about a bridge to Ireland? Lets look at the feasibility, because it brings countries together, it would be economically wonderful, but I don’t have any confidence any government could deliver these big infrastructure deliver these big infrastmclure projects on deliver these big infrastructure projects on time and on budget projects on time and on budget I think it’s a great way of connecting Ireland with Scotland and we should look at it, but we have a Ireland with Scotland and we should look at it, but we have 3 Prime look at it, but we have a Prime Minister look at it, but we have 3 Prime Minister who has spent the last three years building walls and now he wants to start building bridges, so I think it’s a bit rich of him to 55V so I think it’s a bit rich of him to say he was to connect himself in. But you are saying we should look at this? of But you are saying we should look at this? Of course, because if it sensible and feasible... I don’t think it is, because civil engineers have said the water is too deep and rough, you couldn’t do it, but if the government wants to look at a feasibility study, and its deliverable, then fine. But I think it’s maybe another one of Boris’s fantasy projects. Is it, Tom? In 2012, an architect came up with the idea, and the SNP welcomed it as a link between Scotland and Ireland, and now they are against it because it is Boris’s idea. I think it is Boris’s idea. Ithink connecting it is Boris’s idea. I think connecting parts of this country together is something we should look at, and I agree with Ian, I doubt at, and Iagree with Ian, I doubt that the at, and I agree with Ian, I doubt that the feasibility project will pay off but, you know what, a lot of peopla were pay off but, you know what, a lot of people were very negative about the Eurotunnel project, and that has added enormously to all communities, and many infrastructure projects, and many infrastmclure projects, like. . . and many infrastmclure projects, like... Many and many infrastructure projects, like... Many infrastructure like... Many infrastmclure projects, like... Many infrastructure projects, including things like metropolitan railways and undergrounds and things like that, don’t play for themselves in terms of ticket prices or immediate sales, they pay in terms of the economic activity that is conducted off the basis of their construction. 50, basis of their construction. So, look, the Chinese have built bridges longer than that. Whether they have longer than that. whether they have built longer than that. Whether they have built them in such difficult circumstances, I am not qualified to say, but I’d be interested to see. The longest bridge in the world over water connects Hong Kong to Macau, water connects Hong Kong to Marau, about water connects Hong Kong to Macau, about 30 miles, so that is a about 30 mils, so that is a humdinger about 30 miles, so that is a humdinger of a bridge! about 30 miles, so that is a humdinger ofa bridge! 50 about 30 miles, so that is a humdinger of a bridge! 50 the SNP humdinger of a bridge! So the SNP support this? humdinger of a bridge! 50 the SNP support this? I am not negative about the idea. I am sceptical about Boris johnson’s about the idea. I am sceptical about BorisJohnson’s and motives, and I Boris johnson’s and motives, and I am sceptical BorisJohnson’s and motives, and I am sceptical about his ability to deliver it. I think it’s an accident it was thrown on the table like a dead rat it was thrown on the table like a dead cat the day before he was about dead rat the day before he was about to dead cat the day before he was about to announce the increased costs of HSZ to announce the increased costs of H52 and that they are going ahead, and there are no real benefits for Scotland with HSZ, but we would love to see improved rail links between Scotland’s major cities and investment hubs and English cities. That will be important whether or not independence happens. I am not not independence happens. Iam not against the idea not independence happens. I am not against the idea because, I tell you what, in the next ten years, looking at the demographics and the youth at the demographic and the youth vote, at the demographics and the youth vote, Ireland will reunify and Scotland will become independent, and we will both be in the EU. APPLAUSE That is what you are hoping. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if there was a link for Irish trains to come through Scotland, through expanded pots in the south, and go direct to the continent? Remember, when Ireland joined the EEC in 1973, the great bulk of their trade was with England. Now, the balance has changed and a significant amount is with the EU. 50 Scotland needs to with the EU. So Scotland needs to look to its future markets, and our future market is the EU, which is eight times the size of the British market. So I am not... I eight times the size of the British market. So I am not... lam sceptical market. So I am not... lam sceptialabout market. So I am not... lam sceptical about the engineering aspects of the idea, I am not an engineer, but there are long produced elsewhere in the world. I’d love to see improved transport links between Ireland and Scotland, but I very much doubt Boris between Ireland and Scotland, but I very much doubt BorisJohnson will very much doubt Boris johnson will be the person very much doubt BorisJohnson will be the person to deliver it. The woman in the white jacket. , correct the language we are using when talking about Northern Ireland, which is part of the UK, and Ireland, which is a republic and part of the EU? That’s a very good point. The men behind you. Why is it point. The men behind you. why is it that we point. The men behind you. Why is it that we have consistently brought down engineering projects? Why is it down engineering projects? why is it that the down engineering projects? Why is it that the politicians don’t grab hold of the wealth of knowledge that we have in this country and make this a success? It starts from a small seed, and it grows. We built the Skye bridge many years ago. We can Skye bridge many years ago. We ran build Skye bridge many years ago. We can build engineering projects, we have sent men to the moon, we’ve got the International Space Station. Let’s be positive about what we can do, be positive about what we ran do, not go by be positive about what we ran do, not so by party be positive about what we can do, not go by party political points, by criticising Boris not go by party political points, by criticising Borisjohnson, because criticising Boris johnson, because if it was any criticising Borisjohnson, because if it was any other politician on each of the individual parties they would be supporting their own leader. So let’s be positive about the engineering projects that we have in this country. And the woman in the red top. Before we build the bridge, had we not better sort out the road system in Carlisle and the road system in (“artisla and Portpatrick? the road system in Carlisle and Portpatrick? At the moment, driving along there to Cairnryan is sheer along there to Qirnryan is sheer hell for along there to Cairnryan is sheer hell for most lorry drivers and other people. APPLAUSE Val APPLAUSE Val. I am sceptical of the promise of a bridge from Northern Ireland to Scotland as somebody who couldn’t build a bridge from London to London, as somebody said this week. The Garden Bridge. There are indeed many longer bridges in the world, and over difficult terrain and water, but most are not built over a munitions dump, because there is a munitions dump in the middle of the Irish Sea. It’s been there since the Second World War and nobody knows where the musicians are, they regularty where the musicians are, they regularly wash up on beaches on the regularty wash up on beaches on the Ayrshire coast. regularly wash up on beaches on the Ayrshire coast. I’m not happy about driving over a bridge in a storm that’s built on a munitions dump! Apparently there’s about a million tonnes of is discarded after the Second World War, and they are in Beaufort Dyke in the Irish Sea. Second World War, and they are in Beaufort Dyke in the Irish See. It Beaufort Dyke in the Irish Sea. It certainly makes for an interesting journey! Alex? I disagree with the gentleman who said, if it was any other politician, we would be treating this more seriously. I wouldn’t, and if any other politician had proposed this I would still say it’s a nonsense, and a nonsense which has almost zero chance of happening. You might as well propose to build a bridge to Norway while we are at it. Don’t Norway whila we are at it. Don’t forget that Norway while we are at it. Don’t forget that Eurotunnel was, for many 79575- forget that Eurotunnel was, for many years, derided as a ludicrous idea. People had been talking about that for hundreds of years, Napoleon had for hundreds of years, Napolaon had a plan to build for hundreds of years, Napoleon had a plan to build a tunnel under the English Channel. It’s also somebody that nobody apart from I think Ariana that nobody apart from I think Arlene Foster actually wants. Even Ariana Foster actually wants. Even if it Arlene Foster actually wants. Even if it were built, and Val McDermid rates the right points about the difficulty, it will take at least 30 years to do it, by which time plenty years to do it, by which time planty of years to do it, by which time plenty of the people here tonight will have little opportunity to use it. LAUGHTER FACE BIG OVER EACH OTHER. There are people under 30 in this audience! I think the gentleman had an important point, which is that ambition is important for our country. If you look at what our great grandparents achieved in the Victorian era in terms of building the bridge and connecting our country the rail network, in terms of investing hugely in the infrastructure which has seen us infrastmclure which has seen us grow and infrastructure which has seen us grow and develop, building up so much of the infrastructure we now much of the infrastmclure we now enjoy, this is much of the infrastructure we now enjoy, this is something that we should be proud of. We should be looking around the country and looking at the whole UK and seeing where the opportunities are, and there are opportunities to invest, there are some serious opportunities, and I hope some of the projects we build will stay open in bad weather, unlike the Queensferry bridge, and I hope that some of the areas we make investments in will be delivered on-time investments in will be delivered on—time and on budget, London Bridge on-time and on budget, London Bridge station. on—time and on budget, London Bridge station. We have got a good track record here. This is not Berlin record here. This is not Bertin airport which record here. This is not Berlin airport which is now A0 years late. airport which is now 40 years late. Tom is wrong airport which is now A0 years late. Tom is wrong about the bridge, because the bridge has closed once since it was opened two and a half years ago, and it’s remained open on more than 30 patients when the previous route which would have closed because of high winds and, unlike most of Boris’s projects, that bridge was bought in under budget. But it has closed down. The claim was it would never closed as a result of high winds. I completely understand the frustration of people understand the fmstration of peopla when understand the frustration of people when the bridge was closed. I had a ten hour round trip to a funeral in Aberdeen on Tuesday because the bﬂdge Aberdeen on Tuesday because the bridge was closed, but my point is that this bridge has remained, it’s the first time it’s closed, and it’s remained open on 30 occasions when the previous bridge used to close, so let’s get this in perspective. A leader of the Conservative Party in Scotland, acting leader, ended up with egg all over his face yesterday because he was criticising the design of the bridge, and it turned out he’d convened the committee that approved the design. Lets plot the point—scoring to one Lets plot the point-scoring to one side. One Lets plot the point—scoring to one side. One small point about our great Victorian heritage, and engineering achievements were extraordinary but labour was much cheaper then and a lot of people cheaper then and a lot of peopla died. cheaper then and a lot of people died. Let’s take a question from Mark Fowlie. With drug deaths in Mark Fowlie. with dmg deaths in Dundee Mark Fowlie. With drug deaths in Dundee expected to rise, are we doing enough to prevent this? We have been talking about putting it in perspective. Dundee has the highest level of drug—related deaths highest level of duly-related deaths in highest level of drug—related deaths in Scotland and Scotland has the highest level of drug—related deaths highest level of duly-related deaths in Europe. highest level of drug—related deaths in Europe. The SNP has been in government for about 13 years. It’s not looking good on your record. You cannot blame the SNP government wholly for this because drugs policy is controlled from Westminster. Do you take any responsibility? Of course my colleagues in the Scottish Government will take responsible tea for this and more importantly they are taking action. As you will be aware, there will be a drugs summit in Glasgow, there will be two drugs summit, the British covenant have organised one but the Scottish Government have organised one which will take evidence from people who have lived experience of the drugs crisis. That is the crucial difference between the Scottish Government summit and the British government summit. Like the Dundee project that looked at the causes of dmg deaths in project that looked at the causes of drug deaths in this city, the Scottish Government summit will hear evidence from people at the heart of the crisis. I think what’s clear is that the approach to date hasn’t worked. Do you think part of the problem is the cuts that the government has made to this region’s alcohol and drug... It’s a much more complex problem than that. There are lots of things feeding into the crisis including poverty, mental health issues, not crisis including poverty, mental health issues, notjust life health issues, not just life poverty. health issues, notjust life poverty, but poverty of ambition. The Scottish affairs committee at Westminster chaired by my colleague Pete Wishart held up a wide—ranging Pete wishart held up a wide-ranging enquiry into Pete Wishart held up a wide—ranging enquiry into the causes of drug enquiry into the causes of dmg deaths enquiry into the causes of drug deaths in Scotland in the last Parliament, and heard evidence from Partiament, and heard evidence from all sorts Parliament, and heard evidence from all sorts of people and came to the conclusion that what we needed was a pub“: conclusion that what we needed was a public health approach to this and we need to de—criminalise those who we need to de-criminalise those who are just using we need to de—criminalise those who are just using small amounts. Some of my colleagues at Westminster, such as Alison Thewliss, Tommy Sheppard and Ronnie Karen have pushed the idea of having safe drug pushed the idea of having safe dmg consumption pushed the idea of having safe drug consumption rooms, places where peopla ran consumption rooms, places where people can safely consume drugs in a peopla ran safely consume drugs in a safe people can safely consume drugs in a safe environment. We have been pushing the Westminster government to agree to this and so far they have not agreed. I am interested in a blame game here. I am interested in getting to the root of the crisis and finding out what the solutions are. I think in Dundee steps have been done to do that already with the project you have because you have listened to the people who are suffering at the heart of the crisis. That is what the Scottish Government summit will do in February and that evidence, the lived experience of the crisis will be fed into the British government’s next summit as well. next summit as well. This is one of those questions where cooperation matters so much. Because how we work together across all our communities as a direct impact. Drugs don’t as a direct impact. Dmgs don’t recognise as a direct impact. Drugs don’t recognise borders in that sense. They don’t recognise county or council or national borders within our country at all. And we know how many dmgs are our country at all. And we know how many drugs are coming in from overseas and how they come through our country in various different ways. And what about consumption mmours ways. And what about consumption rumours that the SNP have pushed for and the Westminster government... For various reasons we have actually tried consumption rooms, not here in the UK but around Europe, including the Netherlands, where it has attracted serious social issues, from other neighbouring countries into the Netherlands the stop they into the Nethertands the stop they tried it into the Netherlands the stop they tried it in Switzerland with similar tried it in Switzeriand with similar problams. It tried it in Switzerland with similar problems. It isn’t an answer unless problams. It isn’t an answer unless it is part of a problems. It isn’t an answer unless it is part of a much wider strategy. That’s why I welcome the fact the government has organised the Glasgow conference in February. I think it’s really important. I am a little bit surprised that it was only when that was organised at the Scottish Government organised their summit for the day before. The Scottish Government has a for the day before. The Scottish Government has 3 drugs task force Government has a drugs task force set up some Government has 3 drugs task force set up some time ago with someone reading it so this is not the first reaction. The Scottish Government has set up their summit in Glasgow because the British government summit would not set up with hearing evidence from people at the heart of the crisis. Forgive me, as you know very well, joanna, the crisis. Forgive me, as you know very well, Joanna, the SNP has been very well, joanna, the SNP has been in government very well, Joanna, the SNP has been in government here now for over a decade. As you have been in London. Dmgs deaths in decade. As you have been in London. Drugs deaths in Scotland are three Dmgs deaths in Scotland are three times Drugs deaths in Scotland are three times that of the rest of the UK. This is a very serious social crisis. We need a joint approach. This is something we have to work on together and not have separate conferences simply in order to fly a conferences simply in order to ﬂy a ﬂag when conferences simply in order to fly a flag when cooperation is much more ﬂag when cooperation is much more important. The flag when cooperation is much more important. The woman with the blonde hair. I important. The woman with the blonde hair. Isat important. The woman with the blonde hair. I sat on one of the working EWUPS hair. I sat on one of the working groups for the care review, the groups for the rare review, the Scottish groups for the care review, the Scottish independent care review and Scottish independent rare review and it would Scottish independent care review and it would be great for people to acknowledge that we now know the trauma and poverty and adversities peopla face trauma and poverty and adversities people face that are pushing people peopla face that are pushing peopla to drugs and people face that are pushing people to drugs and they feel they have no choice. Young people in Dundee are in crisis with their mental health because of the trauma of the poverty they live in. It needs to be an approach on everything, definitely. The gentleman over here. The problem is that it’s not today or yesterday that this problem has affected Dundee. It’s all very well to talk about summits and new measures, but they don’t sound like measures, controlled consumption, it doesn’t sound like a measure that is likely to tackla sound like a measure that is likely to tackle such an overwhelming to tackla such an overwhelming crisis to tackle such an overwhelming crisis that has been going on for so long. It needs a multifactorial, multi—country, multi—agency multipronged approach. Perhaps look at other towns across the world that have had this problem and found a “Y have had this problem and found a way to solve it. I think a little piecemeal and incremental ways to think about tackling it are just not going to work. going to work. Alex? I am glad listening to the elected representatives hear that they are not playing a blame game or indulging in something as constructive as arguments as to who is than the other person’s summit. The gentleman here is absolutely right that it is a wide—ranging right that it is a wide-ranging problem. right that it is a wide—ranging problem. We still don’t actually, I think, despite a lot of good work that has been done, including by the Scottish affairs committee at Westminster, that we don’t understand why the problem is so much worse in Glasgow and Dundee than it is for instance in Liverpool or Newcastle, cities with similar histories and demographics in some histories and demographic in some respects. But histories and demographics in some respects. But it is. And while it is respects. But it is. And whila it is tme that respects. But it is. And while it is true that cuts to services are not tme that cuts to services are not the only true that cuts to services are not the only reason that things have got worse, it is also reasonable to worse, it is also reasonabla to suppose worse, it is also reasonable to suppose the cuts to those services have not helped. The most recent Scottish Government budget has given some of that money back to some of these services, making up for previous productions, and that is obviously welcome. It is possible obviously welcome. It is possibla that obviously welcome. It is possible that the idea of safe consumption rooms might alleviate matters in Dundee, Glasgow and elsewhere, but I don’t think even proponents of that approach really believe that it is a long term solution. But at the moment, the notion of trying to do what ran moment, the notion of trying to do what can be done to stop matters what ran be done to stop matters getting any what can be done to stop matters getting any worse is probably the first step. Stabilising the situation, which is a fairly depressing way of looking at it, but the notion there is a quick solution to this, I think is misguided, unfortunately. If only that were the use. A unfortunately. If only that were the case. A lot of things come into it use. A lot of things come into it in terms of case. A lot of things come into it in terms of poverty, mental health, educational achievement, aspiration, family breakdown, all these things are involved but it makes it difficult to isolate the single difficult to isolate the singla thing difficult to isolate the single thing that will make a real difference, except in terms perhaps of intervention on a patient by patient basis. What’s going wrong in Scotland? We have the highest death rate in Europe in Dundee and the highest death rate in Europe in Scotland. Those aspects like poverty. Scotland. Those aspects like poverty, trauma, lack of ambition and prosperity. People will take drugs and we have to make it as safe as possibla so drugs and we have to make it as safe as possible so we can ultimately as possibla so we ran ultimately help as possible so we ran ultimately help them to as possible so we can ultimately help them to find a way out of this. In Dundee, the professor of forensic In Dundee, the professor offorensic science In Dundee, the professor of forensic science who specialises in formally legal highs, the kind of drugs being developed as street drugs, there is no control over what is in these drugs will stop they hit the streets and nobody knows what they take. They take overdoses without even knowing they are taking overdoses. I think the way to go is the decriminalisation of drugs. We control them, the government controls them, licenses them, get them from the chemist, the quality is controlled and people know what is controlled and peopla know what they are is controlled and people know what they are taking. Gradually over time you work with people to break the you work with peopla to break the habit. you work with people to break the habit. But while they are still in habit. But whila they are still in the habit, habit. But while they are still in the habit, you make it safe for them to do it and raise money through taxes. APPLAUSE Would you support that, Ian? I don’t think we should come to any knee jerk quick fixes. Over 3000 people died last year and that’s 3000 too many. I had a constituent who lost her son to drugs. It’s a heartbreaking story and something that should never have happened. We have to find a way through this crisis. It is multifaceted, as has been said, there is no doubt about that, and it leads back to poverty but also services. This blame game at Westminster is controlling drug at Westminster is controlling dmg policy so we at Westminster is controlling drug policy so we can’t do anything about it in Scotland doesn’t answer the question of why the Scottish drugs death rate is much higher and wide Dundee’s rate is much death rate is much higher and wide Dundee’s rate is much higher. Maybe we could do it tonight, Dundee’s rate is much higher. Maybe we could do it tonight, maybe both these conferences could commit to come together and lets get the evidence on why Scotland’s death rate is much higher than the rest of the UK when the rest of the UK has the exact same drugs policy. I would suggest part of the problem is a slashing of local government budgets slashing of [oral government budgets where slashing of local government budgets where the services are, a slashing of alcohol and drugs support. The NHS in Scotland is in crisis, and there is an education system that is trying to teach kids where there is more loaded on in terms of how kids are living and you can spot those are living and you ran spot those signs earty on. are living and you can spot those signs early on. It’s a failure in signs earty on. It’s a failure in pub“: signs early on. It’s a failure in public policy and both governments need to take responsivity for that so we don’t have more people losing so we don’t have more peopla losing their son so we don’t have more people losing their son is like my constituent. Let me point out that 1000 died last year. Not 3000, but it is still a year. Mot 3000, but it is still a lot. Maybe year. Not 3000, but it is still a lot. Maybe we will have that conversation about getting the two conferences together. A lot of you have your hands up. Apologies I could not get round more of you on this important topic, but we are out of time. Next week we will be in Weymouth, then Middlesbrough. You can call You can callus or go to the website You ran all us or go to the website if you want to be You can callus or go to the website if you want to be in the audience will stop if you want to carry on talking about these topics then you talking about these topic then you ran join talking about these topic then you ranjoin Rick talking about these topics then you can join Rick Edwards talking about these topics then you canjoin Rick Edwards and guests on ranjoin Rick Edwards and guests on question Time canjoin Rick Edwards and guests on question Time extra time on 5 Live right now. Thank you to the panel and thank you to all of you here for coming along and putting across your questions. Thank you to you at home for watching and listening. From Dundee, goodbye.