Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Brandon Lewis, former Conservative chairman and Brexit minister, appointed Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in December by Boris of State for Northern Ireland in December by BorisJohnson. MP since December by Boris johnson. MP since 2010, former December by Borisjohnson. MP since 2010, former Shadow Work and Pensions Secretary and Ed Miliband, appointed on Sunday by Keir Starmer as Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of as to, Rachel Reeves, Peter Openshaw, professor of experimental medicine at Imperial College, specialist in immunology and lung disease and vice chair of the key committee advising the government on coronavims, committee advising the government on coronavirus, Scottish rap hip—hop coronavims, Scottish rap hip-hop artist and coronavirus, Scottish rap hip—hop artist and broadcaster and winner of the Orwell Prize for his book Property Safari Understanding The Anger Of Britain’s Underclass Darren MoGarvey. Anger Of Britain’s Underclass Darren McGarvey. And later, actress and MoGarvey. And later, actress and mental McGarvey. And later, actress and mental health campaigner Ruby Wax. Good evening and welcome to the programme and my guests, my panel, abbreviated panel, just two of you in the studio, and our panellists joining us down the line. As you know, for obvious reasons, we don’t have an audience in the studio but this week we have asked four questions from people living in and questions from peopla living in and around questions from people living in and around Uxbridge, and they have pre-recorded around Uxbridge, and they have pre—recorded their questions and pre-recorded their questions and will be pre—recorded their questions and will be listed to them in a moment but contact us on social media with your questions and thoughts and comments, and I will get them on this tablet and I will try and feed this tablat and I will try and feed them in this tablet and I will try and feed them in to the discussion as we go on. We all saw the clapping for rarers, on. We all saw the clapping for carers, and we want to add our round of applause. We are suitably grateful to all the work that all the carers are doing. I want to mention, before the questions, that we have heard the news in the last few moments that Boris we have heard the news in the last few moments that BorisJohnson is few moments that Boris johnson is out of few moments that BorisJohnson is out of intensive care. That’s out of intensive rare. That’s obviously out of intensive care. That’s obviously very good news. A huge relief, I imagine. it’s brilliant you send a reminder that people can you send a reminder that people ran recover. you send a reminder that people can recover. It’s you send a reminder that people ran recover. It’s good you send a reminder that people can recover. It’s good to have some positive news generally but really good to know the Prime Minister is on the road to a full recovery. I was confident he would and it’s good to know he is out of I see you. What to know he is out of I see you. what word on how to know he is out of I see you. What word on how soon he might be out of hospital? I word on how soon he might be out of hospital? Ithink word on how soon he might be out of hospital? I think it’s a bit soon for we have hospital? I think it’s a bit soon for we havejust heard he is hospital? I think it’s a bit soon for we have just heard he is out of I see you. He will be following medical advice, as he has done and is encouraging everybody else, but I would like to see him fit and well and back at work as soon as possible, but I know he will follow medical advice and do it the right way. Tank crew I am sure we are all glad he is out of intensive care. glad he is out of intensive rare. Our first glad he is out of intensive care. Ourfirst question is glad he is out of intensive care. Our first question is from the Oxbridge area and from Mervyn Hogg. Hello, my name is Mervyn Hogg and I’m a retired statistician. The Covid-19 I’m a retired statistician. The Covid—19 suppression package is Covid-19 suppression package is beginning Covid—19 suppression package is beginning to work but will need to be maintained until a vaccine is widely available. To minimise the risk of rebound clay intermittent risk of rebound day intermittent social risk of rebound clay intermittent social distancing and other measures will need to continue. What might be will need to continue. what might be the will need to continue. What might be the criteria for turning such measures on and off? How will they be applied in a safe and controlled manner to allow businesses and educational establishments to reopen? Thank this is a question everybody wants answering, Brandon. when might everybody wants answering, Brandon. When might we begin to get out of when might we begin to get out of this When might we begin to get out of this situation? Well, I have been involved into micro meetings on this very issue today, particularly with very issue today, particularty with a focus very issue today, particularly with a focus on this weekend both a quad meeting with Simon Coveney and the first and deputy minister of Northern Ireland, working across UK and Ireland, and we have a shared land bought in and Ireland, and we have a shared [and bought in Ireland, but later on land bought in Ireland, but later on today we had [and bought in Ireland, but later on today we had the Cobra discussion with all of the devolved authorities and ministers involved, looking at what we do this weekend. All evidence at the moment, taking the first part of that question, is right. We have to stay focused on peopla right. We have to stay focused on people staying at home, especially this weekend, and if we have got the good weather we are promised, it’s a bank holiday I think we would all like a bit of bad weather to encourage people to stay home, because we need to stay home. People want to spend time with family and friends and I understand that. This year has to be different, and that time has to be over the phone or video conferencing. We need to stay home at the moment. The first secretary, Dominic Raab, outlined eartier, secretary, Dominic Raab, outlined earlier, later next week we will eartier, later next week we will look at earlier, later next week we will look at where we have got to. For the moment, there is no change to the government position and people should stay home and continue to follow guidelines. Peter, you are obviously advising the government in terms of coronavirus and the government makes the decisions you provide advice. What is your view on provide advice. what is your view on how long we provide advice. What is your view on how long we might or should stay in this kind of lockdown? If you accrue I think it’s vital not to jump ahead and try to make predictions which may be and try to make predictions which may he can’t stick to. At the moment it’s clear there are some early it’s clear there are some earty signs of the it’s clear there are some early signs of the measures taking effect and it’s too early to start pulling and it’s too earty to start pulling any of those and it’s too early to start pulling any of those measures back. It might even be necessary to put extra measures in place. If we are not driving the rates down hard enough. What kind of measures do you need? what kind of measures do you need? At the What kind of measures do you need? At the moment, the measures that have been introduced are not as extreme as they were in Wuhan, say, where they really lock people down absolutely, and nobody was allowed out at all. I am hoping, if the measures that have been taken so far are sufficient that we can really are sufficient that we ran really see a good are sufficient that we can really see a good fall in the rates of hospital admissions and subsequent deaths, then would be the time to start thinking about easing off. But the other important point that Mervyn made was that the way we are finally going to defeat this is by getting vaccines, and we know that there are 78 vaccines at various stages of development, and at least four in clinical trials, and ultimately that will be the way we defeat this, by getting really good vaccines which can then drive this infection away. That is the ultimate hope, but it will take time. We are all being told that we need to wait for the pig, and the peak seems to be a moving target. The Chief Scientific Adviser, Patrick Valiance, talked about the peak Vallance, talked about the peak likely to be this weekend, that was back on March the 27th. Today, he hack on March the 27th. Today, he was talking back on March the 27th. Today, he was talking about we could be weeks from the highest number of deaths. It’s hard to know where we are because it keeps changing. Yes, well, we because it keeps changing. Yes, well, wejust because it keeps changing. Yes, well, we just have to observe this. It’s like trying to turn round a batﬂaship. It’s like trying to turn round a battleship. You can stop the battleship. You ran stop the engines, battleship. You can stop the engines, you can put the propellers engines, you ran put the propellers into engines, you can put the propellers into reverse but it takes time and there is an inherent lack in the system. We have to follow the science and the facts and we mustn’t jump ahead and trying dissipate too much. -- jump ahead and trying dissipate too much. —— there is an inherent lag in much. -- there is an inherent lag in the system. The much. —— there is an inherent lag in the system. The majority of people the system. The majority of peopla have the system. The majority of people have been great at following the guidelines but continue to do that is a really important part, not giving up on what we have achieved so far but keeping going and following those guidelines will be an important part of making sure we have enough control over the virus to get to the other side of it and give the NHS the capacity and time to cope. If you don’t see the kind of behaviour you want to cope. If you don’t see the kind of behaviour you went over Easter, of behaviour you want over Easter, peopla of behaviour you went over Easter, people staying at home, are further measures on the cards? We have really good measures in place and people are generally following them and I’d stress the importance of continuing to do it even over a weekend where it might be tempting to try and do something different. Every time somebody stays home and follows the guidelines this weekend all of us as a country are playing our part in saving lives and helping the NHS. Mike Hadley has sent in a message saying, could the government clarify the law on exercise to resolve the confusion over guidance? I was saddened yesterday, he says, to see an interview with a woman who said she couldn’t take her child to the park because she couldn’t get there and back in 30 minutes. She isn’t restricted to 30 minutes, she? No, peopla isn’t restricted to 30 minutes, she? No, people should go and get exercise once a day. What people shouldn’t do, and as somebody representing a seaside resort, people shouldn’t get in a car to peopla shouldn’t get in a far to travel people shouldn’t get in a car to travel somewhere to exercise. They should take exercise around and from where they live, doing it sensibly and following social distancing. It is good and important for mental and physical health to get exercise but to do it in a sensible and conscious way. Plan, let’s come back to the question, which is about how we get out of this, what measures can we out of this, what measures ran we introduce, do out of this, what measures can we introduce, do we turn them on and off. introduce, do we turn them on and off, which businesses might reopen first? What is a safe way of doing first? what is a safe way of doing this? first? What is a safe way of doing this? What is the Labour view? I this? what is the labour view? I agree with this? What is the Labour view? I agree with what Brendan has said about our behaviours at the moment, and the majority of people are doing and the majority of peopla are doing the right and the majority of people are doing the right thing but the more we do that, the quicker we will be able to come out of that lockdown, so it is in all of our interests that we observe the rules. But I think it’s observe the mles. But I think it’s important not observe the rules. But I think it’s important not to put a date, of course not, we don’t need a date, and it wouldn’t be possible, but we need to start to have some clarification of what circumstances would allow us to relax some of these rules and conditions and closures and how you would go about doing that, so what would be needed in terms of testing, not doing that, so what would be needed in terms of testing, notjust a test in terms of testing, not just a test to show in terms of testing, notjust a test to show whether we have coronavirus at the moment. Those tests need to increase sharply to meet the government targets, but auto should the tests to show if you have ever had it so if you have any immunity to it, and that along with contact tracing so we know you have been in contact with in the period of time you have had coronavirus, those are you have had coronavims, those are the sorts of you have had coronavirus, those are the sorts of measures that countries like South Korea and Singapore and Germany are looking at, and what Keir Starmer has clearly said is Keir Starmer has dearty said is that he Keir Starmer has clearly said is that he would like to see the government publishing their plans for ending the lockdown not the dates. We know that isn’t possible, but the circumstances in which the lockdown would come to an end and how the government go about ending it. That is what we are looking for from the government and I think that is what people are looking for, is what peopla are looking for, greater is what people are looking for, greater clarity about the circumstances. Is it possible that circumstances. Is it possibla that nobody ran circumstances. Is it possible that nobody can really know that at this nobody ran really know that at this stage? nobody can really know that at this stage? Nobody knows the date of this ran edit, but stage? Nobody knows the date of this can edit, but we that, at some ran edit, but we that, at some point, these can edit, but we that, at some point, these restrictions on our lives will be lifted. But how does the government envisage that happening? Will it be when the happening? will it be when the number, happening? Will it be when the number, when we have testing that shows that there is only a certain number of cases detected every day and we are confident that is all of the rases and we are confident that is all of the cases that are emerging because the rases that are emerging because we are doing the cases that are emerging because we are doing testing on a mass level, but also that we have the technology or the resources to put into the contact tracing, to have a technology base, so we know through our smartphone who have been near to? It’s that sort of information that the government might need to start thinking about now so that, when we are in that position, the government are able to relax the mles to government are able to relax the rules to protect lives but also to mles to protect lives but also to protect rules to protect lives but also to protect livelihoods. There are many people at the moment who are really stmggling people at the moment who are really struggling financially because they stmggling financially because they can’t get struggling financially because they can’t get out to work to pay the bills and put food on the table. There are businesses that have had to dose There are businesses that have had to close and are worried they won’t to dose and are worried they won’t be able to open to close and are worried they won’t be able to open again. I think that’s the clarification people are that’s the clarification peopla are looking for that’s the clarification people are looking for and we are pushing for the government to publish. The big downside of a lockdown is that for some peopla downside of a lockdown is that for some people it’s punishing not only some peopla it’s punishing not only economically some people it’s punishing not only economically but in terms of the situation they live in. Custom yes, and I think it’s quite appropriate for you to use the word punishing. We have to look at the ulterior to the demand to return back to normality. People, especially those down the social scale. We have been down the social sale. We have been living in an down the social scale. We have been living in an iteration of the UK which has become increasingly punitive for workers in precarious jobs, lower class children in schools, people who rent accommodation, so if you explore why many peopla accommodation, so if you explore why many people are so keen to return to many peopla are so keen to return to work and many people are so keen to return to work and they might flout the rules, work and they might ﬂout the mles, many of them, work and they might flout the rules, many of them, it’s because they have a fear they are going to suffer in some way or they are going to be punished or reprimanded, because that is what their experience tells them about the society they live in. I commend the government ministers for this real shift in language and emphasising not the things that are deserving and undeserving about us, but actually this talk of togetherness, the idea that society is a ship and we are only steering as safely as the most vulnerable people on it, that we have got homeless people now been put into accommodation. Suddenly, society is vulnerable because we have so many vulnerable people. I vulnerable because we have so many vulnerable people. Ifeel vulnerable because we have so many vulnerable people. I feel that vulnerable because we have so many vulnerable people. Ifeel that that vulnerable peopla. Ifeel that that sort of vulnerable people. Ifeel that that sort of language and that shift in tone, which really does set the tone, when you think about the amount of goodwill which has been unleashed, 1 million volunteers signing up to help the NHS deliver stuff to the elderly, politicians stuff to the elderty, politicians ran stuff to the elderly, politicians ran really stuff to the elderly, politicians can really make a difference. I ran really make a difference. I think can really make a difference. I think this needs to extent, the rhetoric, people need to be told they are not going to be punished, they are not going to suffer unnecessarily, and that ultimately this is not a pretext for austerity 2.0. If government this is not a pretext for austerity 2.0. If government ministers bring into their awareness those sort of anxieties, that conditioning about being punished or kept out of your ﬂat or excluded from school and begin to flat or excluded from school and begin to reflect that in their begin to reﬂect that in their rhetoric, begin to reflect that in their rhetoric, people might become better adjusted to this very necessary and prolonged period of ultimately isolation at home. Can I ask Peter, isolation at home. (“an I ask Peter, what does isolation at home. Can I ask Peter, what does the peak and the point at which we might begin to ease off the lockdown look like? We have heard in Italy they are talking about a certain number of days, a plateau of a number of deaths, and they are beginning to think about when they might ease the lockdown. With all might ease the lockdown. with all the might ease the lockdown. With all the work might ease the lockdown. with all the work you might ease the lockdown. With all the work you have done on viral threats, what does it actually look like? You often only know you have reached the peak when you pass it, so you ran look reached the peak when you pass it, so you can look back and see that so you ran look back and see that things are so you can look back and see that things are declining. We don’t want to take their brakes off completely at that point. The point was being made about the value of testing and the following up contacts when there are relatively few cases, which is are relatively few rases, which is really are relatively few cases, which is really important. It becomes incredibly important to have good tests and a good way of following up those contacts so you can really those contacts so you ran really isolate those contacts so you can really isolate pockets of infection as the numbers come down the other side. Plan, are we talking may be if you had a plateau of a of deaths for a week? What are we aiming for? week? what are we aiming for? Clearty, just week? What are we aiming for? Clearly, just as it takes time to Clearty, just as it takes time to slow down, Clearly, just as it takes time to slow down, it takes time to speed up again so, as you take the brakes off. again so, as you take the brakes off, you don’t see an immediate jump. off, you don’t see an immediate jump, and it will take time for the effects of easing to show up in the statistic, effects of easing to show up in the statistics, so the whole thing is statistic, so the whola thing is quite a statistics, so the whole thing is quite a difficult trip. It’s like using the clutch going when you’re trying to steer this thing get the right amount of easement. Dan, —— right amount of easement. Dan, -- Darren, you look right amount of easement. Dan, —— Darren, you look frustrated. No, I Darren, you look fmstrated. No, I wasn’t Darren, you look frustrated. No, I wasn’t frustrated. I’ve just been informed this is life so I was actually more disorientated. That was my expression. And, you didn’t know we were live. I apologise. You are doing fine so far. And, don’t worry. Let me read you some other messages. Simon tailor, we have a soft lockdown compared to other countries so why are we even considering lifting it when we have the second highest death rate in the world yesterday somebody who calls himself only needles, no comment, why when the country is in lockdown are there still thousands of people are there still thousands of peopla arriving on are there still thousands of people arriving on flights every day from arriving on ﬂights every day from various arriving on flights every day from various coronavirus hotspots without any checks on arrival? Another question I would like to go to, from julia stable. I am question I would like to go to, from Julia stable. I am an Italian national in the UK. In the last two weeks I have been following the situation here and in my home country for the many Italians living here that I know, myself included, were wondering how much of the current UK measures have been informed by what was learned in Italy. Brandon, we have looked at the figures coming out of Italy with, I mean, open mouths in horror, certainly eartier on, with, I mean, open mouths in horror, certainly earlier on, and our death certainly eartier on, and our death toll is not certainly earlier on, and our death toll is not far behind. What lessons toll is not far behind. what lassons is the toll is not far behind. What lessons is the government learning? Customers I think one thing which was really quite striking, and cut through a Image, it was clear from what we were seeing in the hospitals. Our experts are talking to theirs and we are talking to people around the are talking to peopla around the world. are talking to people around the world. The Chief Medical Officer and Chief Scientific advisor and their teams have been looking at what’s happening around the world, talking to other countries. One thing I was talking about earlier today, this talking about eartier today, this week talking about earlier today, this week we have seen a memorandum of understanding between Northern Ireland and the Republic, to make sure we are sharing experiences and ideas. But Brandon, talking about Italy, we all looked at what’s been happening there. Hang on. Just happening there. Hang on. just responding happening there. Hang on. Just responding to happening there. Hang on. Just responding toJulia’s question. Our responding to julia’s question. Our death responding toJulia’s question. Our death rate is approaching that of Italy. Their highest death toll yesterday. Should we have been doing things eartier yesterday. Should we have been doing things earlier not to be in that things eartier not to be in that position? At things earlier not to be in that position? At all times we have taken the medical and scientific advice around what we think is the correct and appropriate response for the UK. Some countries are using different approaches in different regions of the country. It’s not entirely straightforward. Other experts will give a view on that but it’s not straightforward to do a direct comparison from country to country but we’ve taken advice about the right thing to do at the right time. This comes back to the previous question, why we’ve got to be cautious about looking too far into the future when we have to make sure we are following the guidelines today. This question isn’t necessarily about looking at the future but looking back. Peter, you won of the people advising the government. What lessons can we government. what lessons ran we learn government. What lessons can we learn from Italy, or have we learnt lessons? We’ve learnt an learn from Italy, or have we learnt lessons? We’ve learnt an amazing amount, not only from our colleagues in Italy but also from China. Right from the in Italy but also from China. Right from the beginning, the Chinese have been incredibly quick to help us by telling us what they’ve tried, what telling us what therve tried, what therve telling us what they’ve tried, what they’ve found to be advantageous and disadvantageous. They’ve also been disadvantageous. Therve also been very quick to disadvantageous. They’ve also been very quick to publish a lot of data on the management. I would absolutely give credit to the Chinese for their generosity, actually, with all the information therve actually, with all the information they’ve given us. And also, the more therve given us. And also, the more we slow they’ve given us. And also, the more we slow down this epidemic, the more we ran learn, we slow down this epidemic, the more we can learn, and more trials can be we ran learn, and more trials ran be done. At the we can learn, and more trials can be done. At the moment there are literally hundreds of trials going on, different approaches to treatment, many of which are starting to look quite interesting and promising. Coming back to Italy, and promising. Coming backto Italy, they tried a and promising. Coming back to Italy, they tried a drug that they tried a drug that blocks a they tried a dmg that blocks a particular they tried a drug that blocks a particular element and these uncontrolled trials looked like they uncontrollad trials looked like they had amazing uncontrolled trials looked like they had amazing effects on people with advanced disease, so this has been put to proper trial in a controlled way, with placebos and other drugs. We are learning so much scientifically about how this epidemic is unfolding. Can I scientifically about how this epidemic is unfolding. Can Ijust epidemic is unfolding. (“an Ijust ask you, epidemic is unfolding. Can Ijust ask you, Peter, we are minding your experience since we have you. Italy went into lockdown earlier than us. went into lockdown eartier than us. I was went into lockdown earlier than us. I was struck went into lockdown eartier than us. I was stmck by went into lockdown earlier than us. I was struck by the press conference I was stmck by the press conference today, Dominic I was struck by the press conference today, Dominic Raab saying that the lockdown is working, that it has worked and is working, it is saving lives. It begs the question, should we have done it earlier and therefore saved more lives? Yes, very difficult to get the timing right. We knew the measures that would have to be taken and everyone knew what was going to have to be done. I think the issue was, the advice we were getting from some elements of the advisory groups were that we could only do this for a limited time to get the maximum benefit we had to wait until the right moment and then apply the brakes and get the best effect that could possibly be delivered. A very difficult thing. This is a new type of vims. difficult thing. This is a new type of virus. And really we don’t know of vims. And really we don’t know until we try at of virus. And really we don’t know until we try at what’s going to be effective. Darren, from your perspective, what’s your view in terms of, have we learnt lessons? How is it looking from where you are sitting? How is it looking from where you are sitting? In terms of comparisons from other countries? sitting? In terms of comparisons from other countries? I mean, sometimes it can be too simple to sometimes it ran be too simple to compare one sometimes it can be too simple to compare one country with another country and often we lack a lot of the context of how those societies have developed, how they organise their economies but one thing I’ve noticed, and this is my own anecdotal reading of it so correct me if I’m wrong, but it seems like societies where inequality is high are more vulnerable. You can see are more vulnerable. You ran see that in the are more vulnerable. You can see that in the United States, the only society that is more unequal than the UK. I think that accounts for all sorts of reasons. Obviously right now, people like to refer to right now, peopla like to refer to what’s right now, people like to refer to what’s happening in Sweden as an argument for loosening restrictions but in Sweden they’ve got higher but in Sweden therve got higher levels but in Sweden they’ve got higher levels of investment in public services, higher levels of public trust in government, higher levels of personal responsibility because of those investments over the long-term. of those investments over the long—term. Whereas the short—term is long-term. whereas the short-term is that lights the long—term. Whereas the short—term is that lights the British political class in this country is really the chickens coming home to roost unfortunately. I don’t say that glibly or facetiously. unfortunately. I don’t say that glibly orfacetiously. I really unfortunately. I don’t say that glibly or facetiously. I really hope this is a sobering moment for all politicians of all parties, that the “Y politicians of all parties, that the way we organise our society is fundamentally unstable in many ways. Even Bill Gates, who many think is in cahoots with some sort of Even Bill Gates, who many think is in cahoots with some sort ofJewish in cahoots with some sort of jewish race of in cahoots with some sort ofJewish race of aliens from China, nonsense like that, emerging from a society where there is very low trust in institutions, low levels of education and so on, he said himself that his foundation and others had brought to the attention of governments the risk of pandemic and not having vaccines developed. All of the risks he outlined and he said that if we’d invested a fraction in that sort of research and early that sort of research and earty warning that sort of research and early warning system that we do regularly, warning system that we do regularty, maintaining warning system that we do regularly, maintaining the nuclear arsenal, we might not find ourselves in the situation we are currently in. This is a moment of immense humility for us who are deeply invested in the economic and political status quo in society I can’t think of a better argument for looking at it again. Rachel? Going back to the question, there are Rachel? Going back to the question, there are obviously things we need to learn from Italy’s there are obviously things we need to learn from Italy’s experience and to learn from Italrs experience and certainly at to learn from Italy’s experience and certainly at the beginning of this it didn’t feel like the policies around lockdown for example came around lockdown for example fame quickly around lockdown for example came quickly enough. Do you think that labour quickly enough. Do you think that Labour applied enough pressure? Was labour applied enough pressure? Was there a Labour applied enough pressure? Was there a sense they were missing in action for the first few weeks of the crisis because much of the focus was on the leadership election. In the end the government had to make decisions. I know, but Labour have a decisions. I know, but labour have a rola to play as decisions. I know, but Labour have a role to play as the opposition. Yes, certainly under Keir Starmer’s leadership certainly under Keir Starmer’s leadership over the last few days, Labour’s approach has been around Laboqu approach has been around supporting the Labour’s approach has been around supporting the government when they get it right, willing the government to succeed because it’s in all our interests for them to succeed but asking difficult questions to be constructed. It’s true questioning constructed. It’s tme questioning and constructed. It’s true questioning and challenge that you get a better decision made. The point I wanted to mate, we need to learn from experience -- mate, we need to learn from experience —— with the point I experience -- with the point I wanted experience —— with the point I wanted to make, we are learning from the experience of other countries but we are rapidly catching up. We need to listen to people on the front line, those in the NHS and the social rare front line, those in the NHS and the social care sector. What they are social rare sector. what they are saying, what I social care sector. What they are saying, what I hear in Leeds where I am the MP, we need more testing, we need to be testing people who were on the front line in higher numbers and ramping it up quicker but also and I think most importantly, we need to give people on the front line the protective equipment and clothing they’re crying out for. clothing therre crying out for. We’ve clothing they’re crying out for. We’ve seen terrible examples, nurses in Harrow using bin liners to protect themselves because there was nothing else and they now have coronavirus and a doctor from East London who wrote to the Prime Minister saying, London who wrote to the Prime Ministersaying, give London who wrote to the Prime Minister saying, give us the protective equipment, and now that Doctor is dead. I would say to the government that those who understand this best are those on the front line who are delivering the care to line who are delivering the rare to the people line who are delivering the care to the people who are our friends and neighbours and loved ones. We need to ensure that their voices are being heard in this. When they say being heard in this. when they say that we being heard in this. When they say that we don’t have the protective equipment, it’s not to be difficult and cause problems. I know that you and cause problams. I know that you know that, and cause problems. I know that you know that, Brandon. It’s because they are trying to do the right thing and they deserve the best equipment to protect themselves and the people they are supporting in the peopla they are supporting in hospitals or the people they are supporting in hospitals or social care settings hospitals or social rare settings and they hospitals or social care settings and they say they don’t have that. More than anything else that has to be the number one priority of government, to ensure that the people who are dedicating their peopla who are dedicating their lives, people who are dedicating their lives, because of their vocation, putting themselves at risk, that we are doing everything in our power to give them all the material and equipment and clothing that they need to keep themselves safe. We’ve got a situation at the moment where about 8% of people in the NHS are about 896 of peopla in the NHS are off sick. about 8% of people in the NHS are off sick. And probably the same again in social care. If we ramped again in social rare. If we ramped “P again in social rare. If we ramped up testing and again in social care. If we ramped up testing and gave them the protective clothing we could ensure that those on the front line, ensure that when it comes to an end, we’ve lost as few lives as possible. That’s all our priority but we have to listen to those workers. Peter, I want to come to you. We will move onto a different element a moment. when it onto a different element a moment. When it comes to testing and people comment about testing to us time and time again, were we too slow to get off the mark with testing in your view as a scientist advising the government? I’m sorry, the line has been breaking up at this end. Can been breaking up at this end. (“an you hear me? been breaking up at this end. Can you hear me? Yes, can you hear us? you hear me? Yes, ran you hear us? Rachel has you hear me? Yes, can you hear us? Rachel has been talking about testing. Were we too slow getting off the ground with testing? I think nobody would say we’ve been able to test enough and to be quick enough off the mark. It’s incredibly important to appreciate the brave work of scientists who have been developing testing. They’ve been developing testing. Therve been working developing testing. They’ve been working really hard to build up from a fairly low base because there a fairty low base because there hasn’t a fairly low base because there hasn’t been enough investment in pub“: hasn’t been enough investment in public health over the last ten years. The public health infrastructure has been repeatedly infrastmclure has been repeatedly reorganised. infrastructure has been repeatedly reorganised. I think we know now that we get on with the testing but it’s really important that its high quality testing. We know quality testing. We know that there’s nothing worse than a bad test, so we have to have really good tests. Let me give you a flavour of tests. Let me give you a ﬂavour of some of tests. Let me give you a flavour of some of the comments that people are sending. Chris, was it a mistake to sending. Chris, was ita mistake to employ the sending. Chris, was it a mistake to employ the herd immunity strategy and then change it to mass isolation, losing many days? Neal asks if it’s time for a cross—party committee for Covid—19, making the committee for Covid-19, making the decisions committee for Covid—19, making the decisions and taking the politics decisions and taking the politic out of decisions and taking the politics out of it? Tom says, how much of a risk is a second wave pandemic as there was in 1918? Is the government planning for it? Let me move onto question from Thomas. Clearly we are question from Thomas. Cleariy we are all in question from Thomas. Clearly we are all in distress at this difficult time and people deal with it differently. Recently a high—profile differently. Recenﬂya high-profit; figure differently. Recently a high—profile figure travelled with her family to deal with this in her own way. With deal with this in her own way. with such strict deal with this in her own way. With such strict restrictions on her Civil Liberties and to us all, what does the panel think the wider impact could be on our mental health? ﬂ I think Thomas is referring to the Scottish Chief Medical Officer. Ruby Wax, I want to bring you in. The impact on our mental health is something a lot of people are something a lot of peopla are talking something a lot of people are talking about and there is a lot of concern about it. What is your view? concern about it. what is your view? Yes, there is a concern about it. What is your view? Yes, there is a break—up on the Yes, there is a break-up on the line. So Yes, there is a break-up on the line. Sol Yes, there is a break—up on the line. So I didn’t really hear the question. In terms of concerns about the impact on peoples mental health of the lockdown, of isolation, simply of loneliness. Yeah. We are stating the obvious. People say, we need more of this. We all know we need more. But there is an emergency right now so rather than saying, should we have done this, you know, those of us who have mental health issues, we have been practising this for years, so it’s almost like the world is now for years, so it’s almost like the world is nowjoining us. Sorry to go world is now joining us. Sorry to go on about world is nowjoining us. Sorry to go on about what I do, but I have an onUne on about what I do, but I have an online service called Fresnel cafe dot org and everyday, twice a day, there are 100 people each time and it’s a community of people who it’s a community of peopla who express it’s a community of people who express themselves, and really emotionally we are not equipped for this, and it’s not emotionally we are not equipped for this, and it’s notjust about being this, and it’s not just about being mentally ill. mentally ill. I wish politicians would speak human—to—human at one would speak human-to-human at one point. We have would speak human—to—human at one point. We have not been trained emotionally. We don’t understand it is human to be sad to feel like a failure that we have avoided those issues. Along. SOUND BREAKS UP. Plan, sadly there is break—up on Plan, sadly there is break-up on your line, Plan, sadly there is break—up on your line, Rugby. We will try and fix that, Rugby. Frustratingly, you are cutting in and out. Darren, let me come to you. The Chancellor talked about as all being in this together but when it comes to the restriction of civil liberties Thomas was talking about and the effect on our mental health, we are not, are we? It’s much easier effect on our mental health, we are not, are we? It’s much easierfor not, are we? It’s much easier for some peopla to not, are we? It’s much easierfor some people to isolate and much some peopla to isolate and much harder some people to isolate and much harder for others, some people to isolate and much harderfor others, people some people to isolate and much harder for others, people living some people to isolate and much harderfor others, people living in harder for others, peopla living in ﬂats, that harderfor others, people living in flats, that kind of thing. ﬂats, that kind of thing. Yes, I flats, that kind of thing. Yes, I think most people are going Yes, I think most peopla are going to be Yes, I think most people are going to be experiencing some level of mental and emotional discomfort relative to what they can tolerate, relative to what they ran tolerate, so while relative to what they can tolerate, so while obviously some people are so whila obviously some peopla are actually so while obviously some people are actually dealing materially with more acute circumstances, everybody feels a certain level of strain and experiences certain levels of stress and anxiety, and it’s important to note that that is affecting everybody and not note that that is affecting everybody and notjust people who everybody and not just peopla who are everybody and notjust people who are struggling financially. But the are stmggling financially. But the impact of are struggling financially. But the impact of isolation compounded with financial strain, insecurity, as well as many households where you have children who have grown up in that household perhaps with an abusive parent, active addiction in the household, the impacts there are quite severe, and as for the household, the impacts there are quite severe, and as forjust isolation in and of itself, social interaction and connection is everything in life, from the moment that we are in the womb, when we hear the voice of our mother, this brings online many of our first cognitive systems. As we develop as children we get a sense of our place in the world as well as our personality. It’s shaped by the quality of the social connections around us and, even when we are adults and living our lives, without other peopla adults and living our lives, without other people to connect to and other peopla to connect to and physical other people to connect to and physical space and run our full spy physical space and nm our full spy and get a sense physical space and run our full spy and get a sense of usefulness and helping others and listening to others and sharing honestly about feelings, we become very unwell very quickly, and the problem is we very often don’t detect how and where we have become. We to live in our own heads and to buy into the anxieties and fears and resentments that often we ran get and fears and resentments that often we can get away with in daily life we ran get away with in daily life by mnning we can get away with in daily life by running out for a job or going on by mnning out for a job or going on a long drive or by running out for a job or going on a long drive or booking a holiday or doing some retail therapy. Now, a lot of things we previously defined ourselves by have been removed so it’s very challenging in many respects. I want to touch quickly to pluck up quickly, please, because we have Ruby back. The case for listening the lockdown The rase for listening the lockdown because The case for listening the lockdown because of the impacts we are going to see on people, including the to see on peopla, including the mental to see on people, including the mental health problems and people mental health problams and peopla who are mental health problems and people who are not getting treated for cancer. The difference between all of the negative impacts of the lockdown, whether they be medical or mental or emotional or financial is that these things are unknown quantities, so we know roughly how to address a lot of those things and at least mitigate them, we can at least mitigate them, we ran divert at least mitigate them, we can divert resources and raise awareness and deploy people in the community. and deploy peopla in the community. Covid-19 and deploy people in the community. Covid—19 is an unknown quantity. Covid-19 is an unknown quantity. Still Covid—19 is an unknown quantity. Still don’t know basic things about it except the fact it seems to have evolved specifically to avoid detection. 0K, Darren... Darren... I don’t dismiss completely those arguments for listening the lockdown, particularly for those who lockdown, particularty for those who might be in lockdown, particularly for those who might be in some danger, Covid—19, might be in some danger, Covid-19, we don’t might be in some danger, Covid—19, we don’t know enough about it, we don’t know what sort of genie we are letting out of the bottle. Punk latting out of the bottle. Punk rocker letting out of the bottle. Punk rocker we have got Ruby back and she is keen to come in. Will understand is keen to come in. will understand that, but it’s a is keen to come in. Will understand that, but it’s a lot of platitudes. What that, but it’s a lot of platitudes. what do that, but it’s a lot of platitudes. What do we do that connects people. that, but it’s a lot of platitudes. What do we do that connects people. what do we do that connects peopla. What what do we do that connects peopla. what is What do we do that connects people. What is inspiring is that, when you what is inspiring is that, when you see peopla What is inspiring is that, when you see people now, they What is inspiring is that, when you see people now, they are connecting see peopla now, they are connecting in a way see people now, they are connecting in a way they have never connected before, because now we need each other. We are in mutual trauma, so it’s no good talking about, of course, if we lived in a world where our earty course, if we lived in a world where our early identity was what we did our earty identity was what we did for a living and our early identity was what we did for a living and we are run by for a living and we are mn by social for a living and we are run by social media, so maybe we can learn social media, so maybe we ran learn what is going on social media, so maybe we can learn what is going on now, but I had somebody on the line today during one of the Frazzled.org cafe is who one of the Frazzledmrg cafe is who said, rather one of the Frazzled.org cafe is who said, ratherthan one of the Frazzled.org cafe is who said, rather than look at the news the whole time to see the death toll, pumps up your anxiety, let’s talk about emotional contingent, you ran think talk about emotional contingent, you can think to yourself, what can I do ran think to yourself, what ran I do for somebody can think to yourself, what can I do for somebody else today? May be called who needs help? Maybe get in touch and to do their shopping. It will make you feel better even if you are depressed. By the way, there will be a tsunami when this is over. Let’s concentrate on physical safety now. I Let’s concentrate on physical safety now. Ithink, by Let’s concentrate on physical safety now. I think, by being aware of other people, which we haven’t been for a long time, that kindness, as I say, is infectious, so we should try and create or help somebody. I love that the Queen came on... We don’t have a voice that that the Queen came on... We don’t have a voice thatjust that the Queen came on... We don’t have a voice thatjustjust say, have a voice that just just say, yes, we are in have a voice thatjustjust say, yes, we are in danger, we shouldn’t go out. We know that, but somebody to help us understand it is human to be sad and to feel like a failure. just be be sad and to feel like a failure. Just be honest and speak human just be honest and speak human rather Just be honest and speak human rather than standing on your soapbox. I think we can make a connection that might last past this catastrophe. You talk about the longer term impact once we get past fight or ﬂight. longer term impact once we get past fight orﬂight. You longer term impact once we get past fight or flight. You talk about a fight or ﬂight. You talk about a tsunami fight or flight. You talk about a tsunami of depression, and I hope not. what tsunami of depression, and I hope not. What do you think the longer not. what do you think the longer term impact not. What do you think the longer term impact will be? the longer term impact is some people are resilient, impact is some peopla are resilient, it’s in impact is some people are resilient, it’s in their genes, and other people are vulnerable. There will be major mental illness and, as I always say, mental isn’t something that happens from the neck up. Mental is physical. It will breakdown your immune system, make you even more vulnerable. But I don’t want to stoke fear. I really think peopla don’t want to stoke fear. I really think people should try and connect think peopla should try and connect to other think people should try and connect to other people. I know they can’t to other peopla. I know they can’t do it to other people. I know they can’t do it physically, but we were always too busy in our lives before. Maybe now we have the time to make that phone call and reach out. Maybe we could all get the phone numbers of five other people and call up and five other peopla and all up and ask how five other people and all up and ask how they five other people and call up and ask how they are. Let’s make some of these possibilities. Brandon do you want to talk human? I always try but as a politician I might not succeed. That point is really interesting. One thing I found was, That point is really interesting. One thing Ifound was, first That point is really interesting. One thing I found was, first of all, I have worked hard to keep a bit of a routine, that I have been talking to friends and had calls from to friends and had falls from friends, as to friends and had calls from friends, as wife has, but I wouldn’t normally speak to as regularly, and normally speak to as regularty, and I think normally speak to as regularly, and I think there is an important thing, and one benefit... At the Home Office, we also —— we often talked Office, we also -- we often talked about the Office, we also —— we often talked about the dangers of social media but technology can be really helpful but technology ran be really helpful for the but technology can be really helpful for the various apps to connect with peopla. It’s not for the various apps to connect with people. It’s not the same as body peopla. It’s not the same as body language but people. It’s not the same as body language but you can see people and language but you ran see peopla and talk to peopla language but you can see people and talk to people and reach out for talk to peopla and reach out for those talk to people and reach out for those whether you are capable to connect with a friend or somebody you haven’t seen for a while or because you need help or you think they need support, it’s important to do that, and I’ve noticed that in my life. A few friends I have spoken to that I haven’t spoken to for a while that I haven’t spoken to for a whila and I that I haven’t spoken to for a while and I made the effort and that’s important. We are never trained in listening, and I hope social media now develops ways of saying on Twitter, I don’t feel well, I now develops ways of saying on Twitter, I don’t feel well, Ifeel Twitter, Idon’t feel well, Ifeel weak today, Twitter, I don’t feel well, Ifeel weak today, and everybody will rush to help you rather than having to show, look what I’ve got, look at my status. I think that it drove up a lot mental strain. Now we can learn. lot mental strain. Now we ran learn. Punk somebody lot mental strain. Now we can learn. Punk somebody called Michelle Punk somebody rallad Michell; Simpson Punk somebody called Michelle Simpson has sent a message saying, totally agree with Ruby. It seems, if you have already received treatment for mental health it’s ready in your tool box for coping with isolation and this person says, the impact on mental health will be huge. Anybody looked away from human contact for any length of time will understand. Sharon Chapman says, what about the mental health and wellbeing of people who are in lockdown alone, living in flats or lockdown alone, living in ﬂats or apartments? lockdown alone, living in flats or apartments? Why can’t they sit in a apartments? why can’t they sit in a park? Come apartments? Why can’t they sit in a park? Come back to Thomas’s question, he struck about the restrictions on civil liberties and the impact on mental health. I think the term social distancing is unhelpful, because we need physical distancing, and we are doing that now, that we don’t want to be socially distancing from people, we socially distancing from peopla, we want to socially distancing from people, we want to keep up those connections, because they are really important to help us through this. I totally agree with Ruby that a lot of peoplas agree with Ruby that a lot of peoples mental health will be very peoplas mental health will be very badly peoples mental health will be very badly affected by this. Some people already struggle with mental health and other people who might not have and other peopla who might not have known and other people who might not have known that they struggled but certainly are struggling with it certainly are stmggling with it right now certainly are struggling with it right now also, I think Ruby’s point about it unleashing some really wonderful things in our society as well, all of this. We are looking out for our neighbours and friends. We are phoning family members and recognising that, actually, we are not little isolated atoms, we are part of something bigger, and looking out for others. I also agree with Brandon Lewis’s point about a routine. I’ve got two little children so I am home—schooling as children so I am home-schooling as well as children so I am home—schooling as well as everything else. How’s it well as everything else. Hovfs it going? I well as everything else. How’s it going? I mean, I’m brilliant at it, not. But it gives you a routine. You get up in the morning, you do pee with joe, you get up in the morning, you do pee withJoe, you might do some maths with joe, you might do some maths and literacy withJoe, you might do some maths and literacy and then you let them play with a Lego. —— you do physical play with a Lego. -- you do physical education play with a Lego. —— you do physical education with play with a Lego. —— you do physical education withJoe. I’m very lucky education with joe. I’m very lucky for the education withJoe. I’m very lucky for the I’ve with the people I love for the I’ve with the peopla I love but that for the I’ve with the people I love but that isn’t the same for everybody. Some people are on their own, and that’s really difficult. other own, and that’s really difficult. Other people are with abusive other peopla are with abusive partners or Other people are with abusive partners or in an abusive relationship stop they are stuck on the tenth floor of a block of flats the tenth ﬂoor of a block of ﬂats with the tenth floor of a block of flats with two young children. You know, those experiences... It comes back to Darren’s point. Not everybody is experiencing the lockdown in the same way. It depends on your circumstances, in terms of your mental health, physical health and to the surroundings in which you live, and I think those inequalities, they are stark in society, and they are coming home to us and I hope after this we can us and I hope after this we ran build a us and I hope after this we can build a different type of society where we worry more about mental health and social connections and tacklc health and social connections and tackle some of those economic inequalities which mean some people have so little and some so much. Peter, you are listening patiently. Is the effect on mental health something you factor in when you come up with your plans and advice for the government? Yes, on the advisory committees there are mental health experts and it’s really valuable to have them there. We should also flag up that there are should also ﬂag up that there are quite should also flag up that there are quite profound consequences on the mental health of some of the key workers and health care workers, in workers and health rare workers, in particular, who workers and health care workers, in particular, who take extremely difficult decisions under very tough circumstances. They have to make life and death decisions that they feel really uncomfortable about subsequently. This has been highlighted by colleagues at King’s College London talking about moral injury in that you have to make a decision which you then go away and think about afterwards and you think, that person could have lived if only I’d made a different decision. And they feel a great sense of loss and guilt. Ruby, you wanted to add something. I completely sympathise with that, and rather than saying, should we have done something earlier, it would be done something eartier, it would be nice now done something earlier, it would be nice new if done something earlier, it would be nice now if somebody could concentrate a little on what we should do when the trauma really kicks in, if somebody could put their attention on that? That will be the second or third wave. We will be mentally shaken. I don’t mean people with mental illness, I mean those people on the front line. Can those people on the front line. (“an we start those people on the front line. Can we start thinking of what we can do we start thinking of what we ran do now? Let we start thinking of what we can do now? Let me take another question which is particularly pertinent as which is particularty pertinent as we are which is particularly pertinent as we are coming up to Easter weekend, from Louis Kulik. With the lockdown from Louis Kulik. with the lockdown taking its from Louis Kulik. With the lockdown taking its mental toll on many members of the public, is it right for them to use their allocated allowance outside the home for things other than exercise? Darren, there has been so much talk from police constables and the government and [oral police constables and the government and local councils, some of them and [oral councils, some of them dosing parks, and local councils, some of them closing parks, and we heard the dosing parks, and we heard the government closing parks, and we heard the government saying, don’t close parks unless you absolutely have to, if you have got a back garden, it’s not so bad. Obviously, you haven’t, it’s a whola so bad. Obviously, you haven’t, it’s a whole different story. The question is about, should people use their time outside, should they be able to use it for things other than exercise, like playing with the kids or just exercise, like playing with the kids orjust getting exercise, like playing with the kids or just getting fresh exercise, like playing with the kids orjust getting fresh air? What is or just getting fresh air? what is your view? your view? Where you speaking to me? your view? where you speaking to me? I was. your view? where you speaking to me? Iwas. it’s your view? where you speaking to me? I was. it’s very your view? Where you speaking to me? I was. it’s very strange being in this kind of non—environment and connected to you. The whole thing is connected to you. The whola thing is very connected to you. The whole thing is very strange. very strange. Louis Kulik was asking, is it right, given the mental toll that lockdown can take mental toll that lockdown ran take on peopla, is mental toll that lockdown can take on people, is it right for them to on peopla, is it right for them to use on people, is it right for them to use their allocated allowance outside the home for things other than exercise? We have heard different things about whether peopla different things about whether people can sit down in a park or sit peopla ran sit down in a park or sit on a bench people can sit down in a park or sit on a bench or they can’t? What does on a bench or they ain’t? what does it look like on a bench or they can’t? What does it look like to you? I think there is a risk for people in terms of the level of is a risk for people in terms of the level ofjudgment that is a risk for people in terms of the level of judgment that they might level ofjudgment that they might experience level of judgment that they might experience from other members of the public. There was a kind of McCarthyism creeping in slightly Md’arthyism creeping in slightly wear, you McCarthyism creeping in slightly wear, you know, you have got middle—class people on Instagram middle-class peopla on Instagram doing middle—class people on Instagram doing clarinet lessons and yoga, meanwhile the working class people were unsure if they have all the suppUes were unsure if they have all the supplies they have two survive are being viewed sceptically on the news being viewed sceptirauy on the news on public being viewed sceptically on the news on public transport and harangued by police. I on public transport and harangued by police. Ithink on public transport and harangued by police. I think that is beginning to factor into how people move around. factor into how peopla move around. It certainly is for factor into how people move around. It certainly is for me. I think more clear guidance in terms of what wouldn’t undermine the general effort of everyone in society collectively acting to try and flatten the curve, as they are ﬂatten the curve, as they are saying, but flatten the curve, as they are saying, but obviously flatten the curve, as they are saying, but obviouslyjust being outdoors and breathing fresh air and getting a bit of exercise does help immensely. I have had my fair share of mental health problems and I’m in recovery from alcoholism and addiction and there are certain things I need to be able to function. I am quite limited right function. lam quite limited right in what I function. I am quite limited right in what I can do. If I can run for in what I ran do. If I ran nm for 20 minutes in what I can do. If I can run for 20 minutes or even in what I can do. If I can run for 20 minutes or evenjust in what I can do. If I can run for 20 minutes or even just walk, in what I can do. If I can run for 20 minutes or evenjust walk, I in what I can do. If I can run for 20 minutes or evenjust walk, Ifeel 20 minutes or even just walk, I feel a lot better, 20 minutes or evenjust walk, Ifeel a lot better, but I know the options available to me might not be available to everyone right now. I hope that answers the question. It’s hard to hear what you’re asking. You are doing a sterling job. Some are doing a starting job. Some peopla are are doing a sterling job. Some people are asking, why can’t I sit peopla are asking, why can’t I sit on a park people are asking, why can’t I sit on a park bench or people are asking, why can’t I sit on a park bench orjust lie down on on a park bench or just lie down on a piece of grass on a park bench orjust lie down on a piece of grass and soak up some rays? Is coming back to the point about thinking about... We have been mentioning about the people on the front line. What I would say to front line. what I would say to peopla is, front line. What I would say to people is, every time you do something that moves away from where the guidelines are and you do something unnecessary, you are creating a bit more risk of another person been ill and putting more pressure on people on the front line to whom we owe a huge debt for what they are doing, and they are some of the peoples who need that opportunity themselves to get out for some exercise and fresh air and space. And on, some people might space. And on, some peopla might say, why is it OK space. And on, some people might say, why is it OK for somebody to walk in a park for 20 minutes but not sit on a park bench is part of it is down to that social behaviour and the way that people work and and the way that peopla work and interact and the way that people work and interact with each other. If somebody goes into a park and is sitting on a bench or sitting and sunbathing and simply decides to do the same, you quickly get to a point where, peopla the same, you quickly get to a point where, people getting it for exercise in the minimum amount of time to flatten the curve, instead time to ﬂatten the curve, instead you suddenly time to flatten the curve, instead you suddenly have people spending a you suddenly have peopla spending a lot of you suddenly have people spending a lot of time outside sitting down. It’s getting the balance right, which is why we are trying to do this in a way where we ask people to this in a way where we ask peopla to use this in a way where we ask people to use common sense and follow the guidelines in a really sensible way that is thinking of others. Actually, as I said, at the core is thinking about people on the front thinking about peopla on the front line thinking about people on the front line because, every time you follow the stay home wherever you can other the stay home wherever you ran other than that the stay home wherever you can other than that bit of exercise or, if you have to get to work, following the social distancing and guidelines, you are playing your part in saving a life and helping the NHS. If you are going outside, could you look at other people? That also creates that oxytocin, what we were talking about, the bonding chemical. Can we about, the bonding chemical. (“an we not start making about, the bonding chemical. Can we not start making eye contact, even if you are 12 feet away? Everybody has to do a little inch and then the world starts to have a ripple world starts to have a rippla effect. world starts to have a ripple effect. If you can pass a goodwill effect. If you ran pass a goodwill on to effect. If you can pass a goodwill on to somebody, however you do it, open the door on to somebody, however you do it, open the doorfor on to somebody, however you do it, open the door for somebody, gradually the world gets more conscious. Can I say one more thing? conscious. (“an I say one more thing? If anybody out conscious. Can I say one more thing? If anybody out there would like to come to Frazzled.org cafe you are come to Frazzledmrg cafe you are plugging it. come to Frazzled.org cafe you are plugging it. It’s open every day at a good way to talk to other people a good way to talk to other peopla who a good way to talk to other people who feel like you. I have noticed when I’m out for my exercise, people are not looking other people in the eye, because we are all trying to keep our distance so we are looking away and working out how to dodge peopla. It’s a away and working out how to dodge people. It’s a very strange atmosphere. Are you happy, in terms of. atmosphere. Are you happy, in terms of, there is some confusion for some peopla but of, there is some confusion for some people but exactly how they can be peopla but exactly how they ran be outside people but exactly how they can be outside and in what circumstances? Ruby is right, we should smile at each other when we are passing, you ran see each other when we are passing, you can see what is happening is that ran see what is happening is that peopla are can see what is happening is that people are just wanting to make sure peopla are just wanting to make sure they are doing people are just wanting to make sure they are doing the right thing and not wanted to stop or pause but to use that short space of time they have got. Most people want to do the have got. Most peopla want to do the right thing. Some people some of these stories Some peopla some of these stories about hosting Some people some of these stories about hosting parties last weekend, these things are totally irresponsible, to invite people to your house, or to congregate in EWUPS- your house, or to congregate in groups, because as Brendan says, it is going to put more pressure on the NHS and prolong the lockdown for all of us. The more we can do to abide of us. The more we ran do to abide by the mles and of us. The more we can do to abide by the rules and only go out when by the mles and only go out when needed... I by the rules and only go out when needed... I think it’s important that people can exercise and I wouldn’t like to see those freedoms curtailed. It is more strict in some countries. This is the point, unless we stick with the rules we’ve got, we stick with the mles we’ve got, therll have we stick with the rules we’ve got, they’ll have to be tightened, to therll have to be tightened, to everyone’s they’ll have to be tightened, to everyone’s detriment. That is to encourage everyone’s detriment. That is to encourage everyone to do the right thing, this weekend and in the weeks ahead because that will ease the pressure on the add NHS, save lives, and mean we can come out of this and mean we ran come out of this sooner and mean we can come out of this sooner than if people carried on as sooner than if peopla carried on as if it’s sooner than if people carried on as if it’s business as usual. Peter? It must seem if it’s business as usual. Peter? It must seem irrational or punitive. It’s important that people understand when they are It’s important that people understand when they are following the science and doing things which are not going to promote infection. I can’t see what’s wrong with sitting down and taking a bit of sun. The sun is very bad for the virus, damaging its genetic material. That sounds like a fair enough thing to do. Brandon? I think peopla should enough thing to do. Brandon? I think people should be getting exercise. What are we to make of that? People what are we to make of that? People talking about What are we to make of that? People talking about sitting down. I get the logic of what he’s saying. The reason we are saying not to hang around or go sunbathing in places is because when one or two people do it... I represent a seaside resort. If people come to the bench and they are relaxing and sunbathing we’ll end up with the same number on the beach as we do during the peak Easter. We cannot have that. We have Easter. We rannot have that. We have to say to people, Easter. We cannot have that. We have to say to people, get exercise, follow social distancing but apart from that, please stay at home. It will mean that we can come through will mean that we ran come through this and enjoy will mean that we can come through this and enjoy our sunbathing later this year, or next year, and the NHS ran get us to that this year, or next year, and the NHS can get us to that point. The ran get us to that point. The messages can get us to that point. The messages you can go outside but you messages you ran go outside but you have to keep messages you can go outside but you have to keep on the move? Unless you’re going to work, have the exercise, that’s the important part for mental health, but that’s what it’s for. Especially this weekend when it will be tempting. And very warm. I think we’ve got some clarity. Our warm. I think we’ve got some clarity. Ourtime warm. I think we’ve got some clarity. Our time is up, warm. I think we’ve got some clarity. Ourtime is up, I’m warm. I think we’ve got some clarity. Our time is up, I’m afraid. We could talk about this for some time. Question Time will be back next week, at 8pm on BBC One. Tonight the recorded questions came from Uxbridge. Next week we’d like to hear from Uxbridge. Next week we’d like to hearfrom people in and around Wolverhampton. We can’t go there but we’re doing our best to there virtually. There’s been an unusually high number of coronavirus cases there high number of coronavirus rases there so high number of coronavirus cases there so we like to hear from people there. I know it’s not the same as coming to the programme and getting a free cup of tea coming to the programme and getting a free cup of tea on the BBC and being part of the event! You are part of what makes the programme special so we’d like to hear from you. If you live in Wolverhampton or around, apply in the usual time, go to the Question Time website. If asked we will ask you to record your question and we will play it as a pre-recorded question and we will play it as a pre—recorded clip. You can carry on pre-recorded dip. You ran carry on the pre—recorded clip. You can carry on the conversation with pre—recorded clip. You can carry on the conversation with Adrian Charles on five live. For now, thank you to the panel, for Peter, Ruby and Darren. And to you at home for watching. From Question Time, goodbye.