Tonight, we are in Stoke Newington. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s banner, Theresa Villiers, the government’s Environment Secretary, former Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Labour’s Shadow Foreign Secretary and candidate to become the next leader of the Labour Party, Emily of the labour Party, Emily Thornberry, of the Labour Party, Emily Thornberry, Mike Barton, the former Chief Constable of Durham Police, 3 Chief Constabla of Durham Police, a force Chief Constable of Durham Police, 3 force rated outstanding in four consecutive years while he was at consecutive years whila he was at hand, Sarah consecutive years while he was at hand, Sarah Baxter, journalist and deputy editor of the Sunday Times, and businessmen, broadcaster deputy editor of the Sunday Times, and businessmen, broadcasterand and businessmen, broadcaster and equality and businessmen, broadcasterand equality campaigner Trevor Phillips. APPLAUSE Welcome to our panel and our audience and of course, do you attain. You can audience and of course, do you attain. You canjoin in the on attain. You ranjoin in the on social attain. You canjoin in the on social media at #bbcqt so do join in. Let’s take our first question tonight. As the mother of a 14—year—old boy who has been mugged locally three times this year, once at knife point, what are you going to do about it? Can you tell us a bit more about (“an you tell us a bit more about that? You Can you tell us a bit more about that? You are local to this area? He that? You are [oral to this area? He was that? You are [oral to this area? He was13 that? You are local to this area? He was 13 when he was first mugged on was13 when he was first mugged on the high was 13 when he was first mugged on the high Street, which is the A10, the big main road. Just outside this the big main road. just outside this building? Yes, the big main road. Just outside this building? Yes, and once in place old park at 3:30pm on a Sunday in broad daylight. -- in park at 3:30pm on a Sunday in broad daylight. —— in Clissold Park. He is daylight. -- in dissold Park. He is part of daylight. -- in dissold Park. He is maﬁa daylight. —— in Clissold Park. He is part of a generation of children growing up in these parts who, for them, it is just something that happens, Kate, her them, it is just something that happens, Kate, herson was them, it is just something that happens, Kate, her son was mugged just before Christmas. It is like, this is an epidemic. Um, there’s been no sort of resolution in terms of arresting people or... Not in any of arresting peopla or... Not in any of those of arresting people or... Not in any of those instances? No, no. What ofthose instances? No, no. what about you, the of those instances? No, no. What about you, the lady sitting next to her, Kate, has anyone been arrested for what happened to your son? No, nothing at all, no, the case was nothing at all, no, the use was closed nothing at all, no, the case was closed after one day. Wow, that must closed after one day. Now, that must have been closed after one day. Wow, that must have been terrifying for the boys and also for you as parents. Trevor, do you want to kick us off on this? Well... I should first say that full disclosure, I was born ten minutes from here and I grew up in this area. I lived in up the road, everyone in this room will know where woodgrain is —— Wood Green is, where woodgrain is -- Wood Green is, the postcode N where woodgrain is —— Wood Green is, the postcode N 22 come the typical amount of sexual and violent crimes in a London postcode is 26 and where I grew up, it was 226 last year. This is not... It is not across the city but where it is, it is incredibly serious. You know, I completely feel for you. There are three young people, mostly young three young peopla, mostly young men, three young people, mostly young men, dying in this city every week from knife crimes. We... There are two Mam from knife crimes. We... There are two Mecca women who die from domestic violence every week and we have rightly ploughed enormous attention and resources into that. We are not yet doing the same thing for these young people and I think we need to be clear what we are talking about when we are talking about knife crime. This is not some accidental thing. What is happening accidental thing. what is happening here is young accidental thing. What is happening here is young people are being hunted down by tax of other people hunted down by tax of other peopla -- buy packs of hunted down by tax of other people —— buy packs of other people. They -- buy packs of other peopla. They are -- buy packs of other people. They are being —— buy packs of other people. They are being stabbed and aside from the ones who are dying, there are hundreds in this city who are being stabbed and forgive me for being absolutely... Blunt about this, absolutely. . . Blunt about this, there is absolutely... Blunt about this, there is now a thing that they do. They stab kids in the and us so they have to wear colostomy bags. This is vicious, a war, and it is out of control, we and the authorities seem not to be interested except to say, 'Let’s not to be interested except to say, "Let’s have an argument about are there more police or are there more cut?" Actually, everyone who knows about that these kids are doing it in a way that you would have to have North Korean levels of policing to catch them at it. I think we have to do some different things, first and we’ve got to understand what is happening here, in the first thing is, who is doing the killing and who is doing the dying? Let me be absolutely frank and it is young black men who are dying and by the way, black men who are dying and by the “Y- young black men who are dying and by the way, young black men who are doing the killing so we need to focus on those communities and those areas and not pretend that this is something which is just abstract. Secondly, we need to help some of the communities where the young people have come straight from war peopla have come straight from war zones. In people have come straight from war zones. In this area, I think everybody here will know what I’m talking about. We throw them into school... Right micro for people who school... Right micro for peopla who don’t live school... Right micro for people who don’t live locally, the audience at home. London is a very mixed community, it is vibrant, all the rest of it and we receive, rightly, people from terrible backgrounds, children who have seen their relatives killed in front of them, and what do we do? We put them straight into school. We don’t help them, we don’t give them therapy. That is the kind of thing we need to do. We need to spend, first of all, locate the problem properly, locate the problem property, secondly, locate the problem properly, secondly, we need to spend as much as we ran secondly, we need to spend as much as we can to secondly, we need to spend as much as we ran to help secondly, we need to spend as much as we can to help these young people as we ran to help these young people find a way as we can to help these young people find a way through. I mean, I could talk about this all night and I know I haven’t got the time, I feel so passionately about this, I’m sorry, I could go on about it. But let’s take this seriously and not turn this... Let me pre—empt, into an this... Let me pre-empt, into an argument about this... Let me pre—empt, into an argument about who is going to spend more on police, that is not going to be the answer. The answer here is recognising who is killing, who is dying, and help those people, not dying, and help those peopla, not some dying, and help those people, not some general policy. APPLAUSE Just to add to what Trevor is just to add to what Trevor is saying, we Just to add to what Trevor is saying, we have knife offences at the moment at the highest level ever recorded and then today, in terms of offences recorded that then result in a suspect being charged or summonsed, that is a record low around just 796 summonsed, that is a record low around just 7% of offences. Mike, around just 796 of offences. Mike, obviously I’m around just 7% of offences. Mike, obviously I’m going to come to you now is the former Chief Constable of now is the former Chief Constabla of Durham, now is the former Chief Constable of Durham, have you got personal expense of trying to deal with this and what is your view? What did you and what is your view? what did you do in and what is your view? What did you do in Durham to try and have an effect on it? I will come to that, if I may, Fiona, first of all, Lena and Kate, dreadful that you have had to go through this and particularly to go through this and particularty your children to go through this and particularly your children and after the show, if you want to see me, then, I am sure you are being looked after but I can you are being looked after but I ran certainly just you are being looked after but I can certainlyjust make sure that... I’m sure the metropolitan place support are doing their best but if you want, I are doing their best but if you want, Iran are doing their best but if you want, I canjust cast are doing their best but if you want, I can just cast an eye over it want, I unjust fast an eye over it for you. This is my want, I can just cast an eye over it for you. This is my fault. This is the fault of the police, because for 39 years, now, I have done your bidding. I have done it rather well, actually, I’m rather proud of myself. I have locked up a lot of dmg dealars. myself. I have locked up a lot of drug dealers. When I have locked dmg dealars. when I have locked them up, I put drug dealers. When I have locked them up, I put them to court and therve gone to them up, I put them to court and they’ve gone to prison for a long therve gone to prison for a long time but they’ve gone to prison for a long time but two hours after I have locked them up, behind my back, two more violent drug dealers have tried more violent dmg dealars have tried to take more violent drug dealers have tried to take over the patch and the most violent one has won. 50 then I go violent one has won. So then I go after the violent one has won. 50 then I go after the most violent drug dealer after the most violent dmg dealar that has after the most violent drug dealer that has taken over from the previous one and this is a Darwinian spiral of violence. Then we are quite sneaky as cops. We employ undercover police and double agents. And the dmg undercover police and double agents. And the drug dealers worked out that And the dmg dealers worked out that we don’t And the drug dealers worked out that we don’t employ people who are 13 we don’t employ peopla who are 13 and 14 so we don’t employ people who are 13 and 1A so that is who they recruit and 14 so that is who they recmit to do their and 1A so that is who they recruit to do their bidding. The people who deliver all the drugs that I wanted in London, principally, under deliver all the drugs that I wanted in London, principally, under17. in London, principally, under 17. And we in London, principally, under17. And we have created that. We have created that because we have done your bidding. We are never going to... I your bidding. We are never going to... Iagree your bidding. We are never going to... I agree with Trevor, we’re never going to arrest our way out this problem. Of course, the police have got a role to play. Of course, have got a rola to play. Of course, we’ve got to have got a role to play. Of course, we’ve got to investigate crime, and of course, it is vital that the attacks on Lena and Kate’s children are investigated to the fullest extent, but the cuts since 2010 have had an impact. There’s got to be a grown-up had an impact. There’s got to be a grown—up debate about drugs. 39 grown-up debate about drugs. 39 years ago, grown—up debate about drugs. 39 years ago, when I grown—up debate about drugs. 39 years ago, when Ijoined policing, most of the heroine in this country name from most of the heroine in this country came from Afghanistan. It still does. We have got the same number of police officers but 100 times more police officers but100 times more heroin coming police officers but 100 times more heroin coming from Afghanistan. 50 heroin coming from Afghanistan. So what is heroin coming from Afghanistan. 50 what is the answer? Well, the answer is, it has got to be, use and social provision. We have got to prevent this, we’ve got to get upstream. Sadly, the cuts to policing our own mere shadow of the cuts to local mere shadow of the cuts to [oral authority mere shadow of the cuts to local authority budgets on the last ten years. -- are a authority budgets on the last ten years. —— are a mere shadow. years. -- are a mere shadow. APPLAUSE Yes, the woman here. Concerning what the two ladies said over there, three years ago, I was mugged while in labour. I went to hum. The hospital? Gobern yes, just down there in Stamford Hill, there in Stamford Hill, I have not had any arrests and the case is had any arrests and the use is closed. had any arrests and the case is closed. Where I live now in seven dosed. where I live now in seven games, just closed. Where I live now in seven games, just behind my window, three men were fought and killed, I watched everything and nobody asked if I was feeling 0K, watched everything and nobody asked if I was feeling OK, the psychological effect of the past one. These where the killings that happened last week? Yes, they were just behind my window. And no one has asked how I am faring if I am 0K, has asked how I am faring if I am OK, but has asked how I am faring if I am 0K, butfor has asked how I am faring if I am OK, but for my family, who has been doing my school run for me. I OK, but for my family, who has been doing my school run for me. Ijust doing my school nm for me. Ijust want to know, doing my school run for me. Ijust want to know, isn’t it right for the government to set out some organisation that can give advice organisation that ran give advice and any way organisation that can give advice and any way to help the victims? And how are you? So so. Theresa Villiers, you have heard the woman there speak so powerfully and also there speak so powerfuuy and also what there speak so powerfully and also what Mike had to say in terms of pleasing numbers, to a certain extent but nonetheless, it has made an impact but nothing, as he was sane, relative to the cuts to local sane, relative to the cuts to [oral authority sane, relative to the cuts to local authority budgets and we have had a Conservative government to the last ten years. Well, the current situation is intolerable, the situation is intolarable, the upsurge in situation is intolerable, the upsurge in knife crime has to be dealt with and we are determined to do that. Do you feel in part responsible when you hear someone like Mike talk about cuts to local like Mike talk about cuts to [oral authority like Mike talk about cuts to local authority budgets? I believe we need to recmit authority budgets? I believe we need to recruit 20,000 more police. We to recmit 20,000 more police. We are to recruit 20,000 more police. We are committed to doing that. We need a strong police response. We have strength in stop and search powers which are crucial. We are giving which are cmcial. We are giving police the which are crucial. We are giving police the tasers they have requested. We are also fully recognising that we need to invest more in the programme is to prevent young people from getting involved young peopla from getting involved in gangs and young people from getting involved in gangs and crime in the first place. So we have got £700 million worth of programmes planned now for exactly that. We need a dual approach, a tough policing response to bring the perpetrators to justice, but also a really comprehensive route to try to ensure that young people do not get involved in this kind of cycle of violance involved in this kind of cycle of violence in the first place, and to promote that public health approach which has worked so well in Glasgow and many cities in the US as well. Isn’t this just making up for the cuts that you have already made? Know, it’s not, I mean, if you look Know, it’s not, I mean, ifyou look at the last Know, it’s not, I mean, if you look at the last time this upsurge in violent crime on the streets of London happened, that was in around 2008 and actually, Boris, as Mayor of London, brought the murder rate is down by 50%. And it went down is down by 5096. And it went down across is down by 50%. And it went down across the country, not is down by 50%. And it went down across the country, notjust in across the country, not just in London. It across the country, notjust in London. It is possible to do this London. It is possibla to do this and we London. It is possible to do this and we are determined to do this because we have to keep the young people on the streets of this city and others safe. There’s a lot of hands up so Trevor, if you forgive me, I’m going to get around the audience, yes. I me, I’m going to get around the audience, yes. Ijust want to me, I’m going to get around the audience, yes. I just want to follow through with what Trevor said about the peopla through with what Trevor said about the people who are killing are the peopla who are killing are within the people who are killing are within the black community, the peopla who within the black community, the people who are dying are within the peopla who are dying are within the black people who are dying are within the black community. So does it mean, then, that because it is... A problem belonging to particular section society, that the government either doesn’t understand the need or has become desensitised about this population, this group of the population, who, for some reason, it may result from a vicious cycle of deprivation, that no one cares to look into? I don’t know that listening is the answer to it, I don’t know that the political argument about investment is the right answer to this problem. We need to look further than this. APPLAUSE We will come back to that, yes, the woman with the blonde hair and a scarf. I think you are absolutely right, this problem began way before cuts to the Met, it began with the complete abolition of youth services in all the areas. We have just seen [oral in all the areas. We have just seen local services for the youth [oral services for the youth stripped local services for the youth stripped out of communities and young men have nowhere to go, nowhere to turn, no support. Where nowhere to turn, no support. where do they turn? nowhere to turn, no support. Where do they turn? They turn to each other, they become each other’s families. other, they become each other’s families. The cornerstones to young people becoming successful adults peoplc becoming successful adults are people becoming successful adults are self—esteem, confidence, self are self-esteem, confidence, self worth are self—esteem, confidence, self worth and the places where they were getting that youth services and without that, this is where the problem began. The man at the back. ﬂ I think these issues are driven by people’s consumptions. London is the cocaine capital of Europe. We have all been to parties, I have, where it is visibly on show and people it is visibly on show and peopla have no it is visibly on show and people have no qualms about using it. People who join these gangs, they see that there is money in drug see that there is money in dmg dealing, so see that there is money in drug dealing, so maybe the government needs to look at its drug policies needs to look at its dmg policies as well. needs to look at its drug policies as well. Maybe there is an option in a decriminalisation model like they have in Portugal or something which might solve it from the demand side. Not parties I go to, but maybe I am eating the wrong people. Trevor, I agree with you about how it is not just police numbers, but I don’t think you ran just police numbers, but I don’t think you can underestimate the think you ran underestimate the concept of think you can underestimate the concept of government’s cuts to police numbers, because the extra 20,000 police officers that Boris johnson is 20,000 police officers that Boris Johnson is going to recruit will johnson is going to recmit will only begin Johnson is going to recruit will only begin to bring levels back to where they were. The police number cuts are such a significant thing and it has to be taken into consideration, and the part that has played in knife crime. Emily. I think you’re right. We are not played in knife crime. Emily. I think you’re right. We are notjust think you’re right. We are not just talking about think you’re right. We are notjust talking about because the police talking about berause the police numbers, talking about because the police numbers, we are also talking about the community support officers he used to be the eyes and ears, who used to mn used to be the eyes and ears, who used to run the boxing clubs in my used to nm the boxing clubs in my area, who used to run the boxing clubs in my area, who used to have a connection with the community. Because communities cannot be policed. Policing isn’t something which is done to a community, it can only be done to a community, it ran only be done with done to a community, it can only be done with the agreement of the community and you must work with the community. My heart goes out to you two. I community. My heart goes out to you two. lam community. My heart goes out to you two. I am a local mother as well. two. I am a [oral mother as well. All three of my two. I am a local mother as well. All three of my kids have been mugged. They have all had their bicycle stolen. It’s terrifying. One bicyda stolan. It’s terrifying. One of bicycle stolen. It’s terrifying. One of the perpetrators was taken to court because my daughter ran out and got a police car to arrest the and got a police far to arrest the person. But it is and got a police car to arrest the person. But it is terrifying and it is something we live with day—to—day is something we live with day-to-day in the is something we live with day—to—day in the inner is something we live with day-to-day in the inner city. is something we live with day—to—day in the inner city. And there are levels. There are the street muggings, and then there are the dmg dealers muggings, and then there are the drug dealers and drug gangs. As a dmg dealars and dmg gangs. As a [oral drug dealers and drug gangs. As a local member of parliament, I have [oral member of partiament, I have been to so local member of parliament, I have been to so many mothers’ houses, not been to so many mothers“ houses, not just black been to so many mothers’ houses, not just black mothers, been to so many mothers’ houses, not just black mothers, but mothers from all different communities, because the gangs are actually very multiracial, and I go and knock on the door and I give the mum letter and I say if you ever need me, I am here and sometimes they ask me in immediately, and sometimes they don’t. It takes years and I continue to have families that I look after because nobody ever gets over this. And not only is the life of the young person who is murdered ruined young person who is murdered mined and all of young person who is murdered ruined and all of their young person who is murdered ruined and all of theirfamily, but young person who is murdered ruined and all of their family, but so young person who is murdered ruined and all of theirfamily, but so is and all of their family, but so is the stupid, and all of theirfamily, but so is the stupid, terrible young man who has stabbed someone and who in turn, if they get cut and go to prison, their familrs if they get cut and go to prison, their family’s lives are wrecked. We their familrs lives are wrecked. We know their family’s lives are wrecked. We know what the solution is. We have to have more police officers and community police officers, but we also have to have more youth services. My borough next door has had 70% cuts from government to its had 7096 cuts from government to its central ground. had 70% cuts from government to its central ground. Hackney has had the same. And what happens when you cut back a [oral same. And what happens when you cut back a local authority that much? hack a [oral authority that much? They only do back a local authority that much? They only do what the law says they have to do. And because the law doesn’t say they have to provide youth services, because they have to provide social care and other things provide social rare and other things like looking provide social care and other things like looking after kids in care and like looking after kids in rare and that sort like looking after kids in care and that sort of thing, they cut like looking after kids in care and that sort of thing, they cutback on that sort of thing, they cut back on youth services. that sort of thing, they cutback on youth services. They don’t want to, but they have to and then what do these youngsters do, somebody else set? When a child gets to 11, 12, set? when a child gets to“, 12, 13, they want set? When a child gets to 11, 12, 13, they want to find a role model 13, they want to find a rola model outside 13, they want to find a role model outside the family because that is part of growing up. And if there isn’t a sports teacher or a youth worker or a teacher who has the time for them, they will find role models amongst their own age group and this is how gangs develop. I don’t directly disagree with anything that peopla directly disagree with anything that people have said on this panel and peopla have said on this panel and in the people have said on this panel and in the audience. And I appreciate the point about middle—class drug the point about middle-class dmg takers the point about middle—class drug takers who are happy to take the cocaine and not worry about who is supplying it. At the same time, as a mother of a 19—year—old, I was mother of a 19-year-old, I was relieved mother of a 19—year—old, I was relieved when he got to the age of 19 because I felt he was so vulnerable in the neighbourhood like this, not far from vulnerable in the neighbourhood like this, not farfrom here, where he this, not far from here, where he was 14 or 15 this, not farfrom here, where he was 1A or 15 and I am glad he is was 14 or 15 and I am glad he is finally getting was 1A or 15 and I am glad he is finally getting to manhood. But in my area, where there have been several deaths, it is unquestionably not just a rase several deaths, it is unquestionably notjust a case of more police, but not just a use of more police, but more notjust a case of more police, but more visible police on the street. I hope that is what Boris more visible police on the street. I hope that is what BorisJohnson hope that is what Boris johnson means by an hope that is what BorisJohnson means by an extra 20,000. I would like to see more. At one stage, the police fame and like to see more. At one stage, the police came and sat like to see more. At one stage, the police came and satin our area police fame and sat in our area where police came and sat in our area where local youths congregated. They where [oral youths congregated. They were where local youths congregated. They were there night after night for about a month and that finally dismpted about a month and that finally disrupted the gangs, and they haven’t properly returned. It is haven’t property returned. It is still a bit haven’t properly returned. It is still a bit scary, but they haven’t returned two or three years on and that is the importance of having mP5 that is the importance of having cops that care about communities who cops that rare about communities who are cops that care about communities who are determined to be there until they have done something about the problem. I have also had experience recently of a poor kid dying on the streets near me. There was crime seem ticker tape and I went up to the [oral seem ticker tape and I went up to the local policeman and said, what the [oral policeman and said, what has the local policeman and said, what has happened? And he acted like I was a nobody had a real nerve to ask what was going on in my own community. So what was going on in my own community. Sol what was going on in my own community. So I expect police to be polite to the people who live in the area, to discuss problems who live there. For area, to discuss problems who live there. Forall they area, to discuss problems who live there. For all they know, area, to discuss problems who live there. Forall they know, I area, to discuss problems who live there. For all they know, I could have been a witness, I could have seen someone run away or put a knife seen someone mn away or put a knife in the bin, but seen someone run away or put a knife in the bin, but they acted like they didn’t want to hear from me. in the bin, but they acted like they didn’t want to hearfrom me. And I didn’t want to hear from me. And I think a lot didn’t want to hearfrom me. And I think a lot of us feel like you can think a lot of us feel like you ran increase think a lot of us feel like you can increase police numbers, but are the police actually helping us? They have done in the past and I have benefited from that, but not always. I would love to see more of that active policing so that you can call active policing so that you ran all somebody active policing so that you can call somebody and ask what is going on. Mike? If only you had been the Chief Constable in Durham, because you are Constabla in Durham, because you are spot on. If Constable in Durham, because you are spot on. If one of my police officers had been as rude to you is that, I officers had been as rude to you is that, Iwould officers had been as rude to you is that, I would have been officers had been as rude to you is that, I would have beenjolly unimpressed. Policing is dead straight forward, folks. We have got to be approachable, kind and ruthless when appropriate. But you mthless when appropriate. But you have got to ruthless when appropriate. But you have got to know who we are. If you don’t know our names, how can we don’t know our names, how ran we please with don’t know our names, how can we please with you? When Robert Peel please with you? when Robert Peel set up the please with you? When Robert Peel set up the police, he said the police and other public and the pub“: police and other public and the public are the police. We are not an army of occupation. Sadly, if police officers feel beleaguered, then sometimes you do get those dysfunctional relationships. You have got to have neighbourhood police officers and hopefully a loral police officers and hopefully a local police station where you know [oral police station where you know their local police station where you know their names and they are on patrol with PCSOs. Those offices and PCSOs with P605. Those offices and P605 have to with PCSOs. Those offices and PCSOs have to have a spring in their step. One of the things that inspectors always said when they came to Durham was, gosh, it feels different here. You have to engender that feeling that you ran You have to engender that feeling that you can do something. Let’s not that you ran do something. Let’s not be that you can do something. Let’s not be fatalistic. You asked me what we did, Fiona. We arrest people, but we did, Fiona. We arrest peopla, but we don’t did, Fiona. We arrest people, but we don’t necessarily prosecute. If somebody has been stabbed, then dearty that somebody has been stabbed, then clearly that goes to court, but I’m dearty that goes to court, but I’m talking about clearly that goes to court, but I’m talking about the precursor behaviour. We all know about adverse child experiences. So in Durham, there is something called the mini there is something railed the mini police at there is something called the mini police at every there is something called the mini police at everyjunior school now. police at every junior school now. And we police at everyjunior school now. And we make sure the most disadvantaged kids are part of that with the police uniform. They learn about social cohesion. And it isn’t twee, its hard—hitting and has a twee, its hard-hitting and has a major impact. twee, its hard—hitting and has a major impact. Those children have got civic values for the rest of their lives. Trevor? I got civic values for the rest of their lives. Trevor? lam got civic values for the rest of their lives. Trevor? I am going to put back on a couple of things. I don’t want drugs in my city. I would like to have more police officers, but we are talking about a specific thing. Three young men will die before this programme is broadcast again, and we know what they look like, we know what part of the city they come from. And we also know that it isn’t about something happening externally. Talk to these kids and they will tell you about beef. They will tell you about the insane reasons these things happen, which are outside the can of people which are outside the ran of peopla on this panel which are outside the can of people on this panel and people in the audience. We need to understand what they are doing and why. If I had a son, he would be well off, but I bet he would stand a good chance of being involved in this kind of thing too. There are two practical things we could do. First, I would like to see somebody stop glorifying the culture and the music and all of that that does drill, guns, kill, kill, kill, and disrespects women. We make heroes of the people who make this music. I need to be blunt about that. That is one of the reasons that young people are into reasons that young peopla are into it. The reasons that young people are into it. The second thing we could do, we ran handle it. The second thing we could do, we can handle the police, but that will ran handla the police, but that will take can handle the police, but that will take time. Across the road from here, there is a park. My mum pushed me around it as a baby. Nobody will walk across that part tonight, Clissold Park, because it is too dissold Park, because it is too dangerous. Clissold Park, because it is too dangerous. One of the reasons is that we have public spaces now which is to be the province of that we have public spaces now which is to be the province ofjanitors and park keepers and schools would have teaching assistants who would work with people. In Hackney, that work with peopla. In Hackney, that is something work with people. In Hackney, that is something that a successful school did. Maybe one thing you could do is invest in bringing back some of those intermediate professionals, not the big deal, but people who are just there, because these things happen in places where nobody is watching. The more we can nobody is watching. The more we ran have those park nobody is watching. The more we can have those park keepers and janitors back, the people who are around, the back, the peopla who are around, the more likely back, the people who are around, the more likely we are to protect our kids. Do the simple thing first. I’m going to move on, but I want to come back to you, Lena. I know about 30 peopla who back to you, Lena. I know about 30 people who have been mugged in Clissold Park and through this community network that I am part of. I have seen two policemen wants patrolling. We are communicating with the authorities through this network that I am part of and we tell them and encourage people to report. But tell them and encourage people to report. Butl tell them and encourage people to report. But I have only once seen any police there. The other thing is that there is evidence that says the increase in exclusion from school is tied to the increase in street crime, so we are excluding more and more and schools are becoming stricter. That is a question for the Tory government. If you will forgive me, I’m going to take another question, but thank you for your contribution. Before I do, next week we will be the Derbyshire spa town of Buxton. The week after, we will be in Hertfordshire. If you want to be in the audience, call. Let’s ta ke Let’s take another question now from Phil Connolley. F. Isa Is a potential trade agreement with the US knowing jeopardy as a result of the new digital tax? of the new digital tax? We had the Chancellor say he is introducing a new digital tax in April. We also had the USA if you do that, we will slap a tariff on your cuts. Are you going to go ahead? We are going to goin go 9 to go ah ead? w e are goin 9 to going to go ahead? We are going to go ahead with our digital services tax. I believe it is vital that big international businesses pay their taxes. We have been working on this for many years at an international level, and solving it at an international level is the best way to do it. But that is taking so long that we have to act domestically now. Even if the US carries out its threat, which it has on whiskey, as you know. Even if the US makes good on this threat? We export one in five tars on this threat? We export one in five cars to the US, it is worth over £7 billion a year, but you will still go ahead with this tax? The digital services tax is the right thing to do. We decide our taxes, not the US. But you want to do a trade deal with them. That was the idea of Brexit. Is it worth a tariff on cars? There is right for public concern about aggressive tax avoidance schemes by large multinational companies. Those which are economically active in this country should pay their fair share of taxes, not least because these businesses are competing with our [oral high businesses are competing with our local high streets, with small businesses having to pay business rates. It’s time these big companies paid their fair rates. It’s time these big companies paid theirfair share rates. It’s time these big companies paid theirfairshare and rates. It’s time these big companies paid theirfair share and this paid their fair share and this digital paid theirfair share and this digital services tax in a further step to making sure that that happens. Emily? I step to making sure that that happens. Emily? Iagree step to making sure that that happens. Emily? I agree with you! happens. Emily? I agree with you! I happens. Emily? Iagree with you! I think it’s happens. Emily? I agree with you! I think it’s outrageous. If you look at the so called prophets that Starbucks make, for goodness’ sake, Starbucks make, for goodness“ sake, look at Starbucks make, for goodness’ sake, look at the number of stores they have up and down the country and then look at the amount of profit they claim they make. They are taking the Mickey. Taxes should be something that everybody pays. When Starbucks employ someone, they are employing someone who has been educated thanks to our taxes. They walk down the same streets that we have paid for, why aren’t they paving have paid for, why aren’t they paying for it? It is about time. I agree with the frustration that we agree with the fmstration that we should agree with the frustration that we should be dealing with this internationally. Of course that is the way to deal with these international companies who will play off one country against another. We have to control these international companies, but if it is not happening, we can’t international companies, but if it is not happening, we can’tjust keep is not happening, we can’t just keep waiting. So do is not happening, we can’tjust keep waiting. 50 do you think the car manufacturers will thank you for that? Frankly, 50% of our pages with that? Frankly, 5096 of our pages with the European that? Frankly, 50% of our pages with the European Union and our primary concern should be making sure we have a trade deal with the European Union between now and the end of the year. Boris Union between now and the end of the year. BorisJohnson claims he will year. Boris johnson claims he will be able year. BorisJohnson claims he will be able to year. Boris johnson claims he will be able to get year. BorisJohnson claims he will be able to get that trade deal done. I think most rightly thinking people I think most rightly thinking peopla think I think most rightly thinking people think this is fantasy on his part and he won’t be able to get it done. And attach to our leaving the European Union is that there are 60 other countries with whom we have trade deals through A0 other agreements and if we are leaving the European Union, we will not only have the trade deal with the European Union, but we were also made the trade deals with the other 60 countries. We don’t have a trade deal with the United States and have been trading with them a lot in any event. So when we are always being told, don’t worry about Europe, Donald Tmmp told, don’t worry about Europe, Donald Trump will save us, I don’t Donald Tmmp will save us, I don’t believe it. Donald Trump will save us, I don’t believe it. He keeps telling us he is a great deal—maker. We have yet is a great deal-maker. We have yet to see one is a great deal—maker. We have yet to see one on is a great deal-maker. We have yet to see one on any is a great deal—maker. We have yet to see one on any level. Where is to see one on any lavel. where is the deal of to see one on any level. Where is the deal of the century he was supposed to do in Israel and Palestine? It is all supposed to do in Israel and Palestine? It is alljust hot air Palestine? It is all just hot air and he Palestine? It is alljust hot air and he doesn’t come with these deals at all. We should just make sure we are getting people to pay their are getting peopla to pay their taxes. The man in the middle. Emily has made some of the point that I was going to make, the threat to the same trade deal with the United States, the climate denying stable genius that is Donald Trump and I genius that is Donald Tmmp and I think if genius that is Donald Trump and I think if anything is going to derail a trade deal, it will be him. He woman in the red top. Well, other countries are already doing it, France and Spain, some of the Asian country. Doing what? In terms of introducing this tax. Right, well, France is delaying its. But they are going to introduce it and the OECD eventually will do it. So it should be an international agreement? Donald Trump cannot have a hissy fit Donald Tmmp cannot have a hissy fit with everyone Donald Trump cannot have a hissy fit with everyone so we might as well go ahead. All right, the woman at the with the glasses. We know how Donald Tmmp with the glasses. We know how Donald Trump operates, he is very transactional. Because there is alignment across other countries on digital tax, he alignment across other countries on digitaltax, he might alignment across other countries on digital tax, he might expect to lose on that or give on that. How do we know that the Tory government will say, in exchange for taxing technology companies, sacrifice the NHS, perhaps, allow privatisation? I will come back to you on that commentaries about let me get around the panel, Sarah. I love America, I’m half American but I don’t believe even the hardest of hard Brexiteers voted to leave the European Union Brexiteers voted to leave the European Unionjust Brexiteers voted to leave the European Union just to Brexiteers voted to leave the European Unionjust to become America’s poodle. I don’t think it America’s poodla. I don’t think it would be America’s poodle. I don’t think it would be a good look for Boris johnson to would be a good look for Boris Johnson to be saying yes to johnson to be saying yes to everything Johnson to be saying yes to everything Donald Trump asks for because he is the kind of President that will just ask for more. So because he is the kind of President that willjust ask for more. So we that will just ask for more. So we are a sovereign that willjust ask for more. So we are a sovereign nation. We ought to be able to chew gum and walk at the same time, we are going to have to make deals all over the world, with the European Union because they are our closest partner, with America because we have always had a very good trading relationship with the US, and I think it has got rather over over complicated by Remainers insisting it is all going to be a disaster, we will have chlorinated chicken which I’ve eaten for years without any effect whatsoever from the US or conversely that Brexiteers 55V the US or conversely that Brexiteers say we must not have any links left with the European Union. Let’s say we must not have any links left with the European Union. Let’sjust with the European Union. Let’s just dial it down, with the European Union. Let’sjust dial it down, we are leaving the European Union very soon and we have to have good trade with everybody. Actually, I think there will end up being a lot of tough talk but goodwill in the end. That is very sensible, maybe a little too pragmatic but that is how... Optimistic, Emily is muttering under her breath. That is how trade deals are sealed in the end, people, my. Trevor? Amazingly, I are sealed in the end, people, my. Trevor? Amazingly, Iagree are sealed in the end, people, my. Trevor? Amazingly, I agree with what has been said, the big tech companies, I chair has been said, the big tech companies, I chaira has been said, the big tech companies, I chair a tech company, and we don’t make that kind of money, but the big tech companies are paying, I think, money, but the big tech companies are paying, Ithink, between money, but the big tech companies are paying, I think, between two — are paying, I think, between two - 31: tax are paying, I think, between two - 396 tax right are paying, I think, between two — 3% tax right now, everyone in this 396 tax right now, everyone in this room is going 3% tax right now, everyone in this room is going to be paying between 20-405 room is going to be paying between 20-40% tax. It is room is going to be paying between 20—A0% tax. It is just mad that we 20-4096 tax. It is just mad that we allow 20—A0% tax. It is just mad that we allow them to do it, and frankly, they know it is mad and they know it’s not going to go on for ever, so frankly, I’m completely with you. Interesting, by the way, that I kind of like what Sajid Javid did the of like what Sajid javid did the other day. of like what Sajid Javid did the other day. He’s obviously been reading Donald Trump’s book, The Art of reading Donald Trump’s book, The Art Of The Deal, Sarah is right, Trump Of The Deal, Sarah is right, Tmmp is a bully but Of The Deal, Sarah is right, Trump is a bully but when he is confronted with someone who says, "Get out of here’, like with someone who says, "Get out of here", like most bullies, he starts to back down. But he put a tariff on whiskey, made good on a straight. For about ten minutes but it’s not going to be forever, the point is, I think Sajid Javid is at the right think Sajid javid is at the right thing, he think Sajid Javid is at the right thing, he said, "You know what? We are going to tax these guys until we get an international deal", which 5575 get an international deal", which says to Tmmp, get an international deal", which says to Trump, "Get on with it", and says to Tmmp, "Get on with it’, and I think that is says to Trump, "Get on with it", and I think that is the right way to deal with Donald Trump. This guy is not, you know, he is not the devil incarnate. He is not, you know, he is not the devil incarnate. He isjust a bloke. incarnate. He is justa bloke. Actually, incarnate. He isjust a bloke. Actually, with most blokes, as all of the men in here can attest, you of the men in here ran attest, you ran deal of the men in here can attest, you can deal with them by standing up to ran deal with them by standing up to them property. can deal with them by standing up to them properly. APPLAUSE them property. APPLAUSE The them properly. APPLAUSE The women are clapping and their men are not! Phil is clapping and he asked the question, are these the kind of trade—offs we will be kind of trade-offs we will be seeing, kind of trade—offs we will be seeing, given the new era we will be in as of next Friday? I think it is a good question from Phil, and I will think about your question now. In answer to the first part of the question, is this a risk worth taking? Well, I question, is this a risk worth taking? Well, Ithink question, is this a risk worth taking? Well, I think it is, taking? Well, Ithink it is, precisely taking? Well, I think it is, precisely because of what Trevor and the others have said which was that we have actually got to do something with the tech firms. I have been hanging on about the tech firms as a banging on about the tech firms as a police hanging on about the tech firms as a police chief for banging on about the tech firms as a police chief for the last ten years, that they were not paying their dues. One of the reasons why you don’t see police officers on the street is 50% of all crime now that street is 5096 of all crime now that occurs in street is 50% of all crime now that occurs in the UK is actually online. And the people who have caused that, And the peopla who have caused that, who And the people who have caused that, who facilitate it, who allow it, they pay no tax. So a levy of 2%, in they pay no tax. So a levy of 296, in my book, is not they pay no tax. 50 a levy of 2%, in my book, is not enough. It was really interesting, the head of Google Alphabet this week speculated that Al, artificial intelligence, is going to be more important for humans than fire. Well, I have got a bit of advice for him, I think that fire is more important than artificial intelligence and paying tax is definitely more important than artificial intelligence and they are just not doing it. They are accumulating billions of pounds. We investigate a crime a few years ago, it was just graffiti in Durham investigate a crime a few years ago, it wasjust graffiti in Durham city it was just graffiti in Durham city centre, it it wasjust graffiti in Durham city centre, it was a World Heritage Site, and we spotted one of our... One of our good cops spotted the tag on Flickr, so it was an easy One of our good cops spotted the tag on Flickr, so it was an easyjob, it on Flickr, so it was an easy job, it was a young chap, on Flickr, so it was an easyjob, it was a young chap, young person committing this time but it took us nine months of legal wrangling in the courts of southern California for us to tell us who that —— for for us to tell us who that -- for them to tell for us to tell us who that —— for them to tell us who the person was and when we walked around the house, it was a 16—year—old boy and he put it was a 16-year-old boy and he put his hands it was a16—year—old boy and he put his hands out and said, "What took his hands out and said, "what took you so long?‘ his hands out and said, "What took you so long?" This is costing you you so long?‘ This is costing you money and you so long?" This is costing you money and they are not paying taxes and it is high time they did. APPLAUSE 0K, APPLAUSE OK, let’s take another question. Do Londoners live in a political bubble and should Labour stop listening to them if they want to win an election? APPLAUSE Emily? Should you stop listening? I think... I Emily? Should you stop listening? I think... Ithink Emily? Should you stop listening? I think... I think what is important is that politicians always listen and that they listen to people from and that they listen to peopla from all over. and that they listen to people from all over. Do you think Labour has all over. Do you think labour has been listening all over. Do you think Labour has been listening to the wrong people? Know, I think Labour has been Know, I think labour has been listening to Know, I think Labour has been listening to people in all of our communities. I think we could not agree on what the right approach on Brexit was and frankly, I think that what happened with the last general election was a monumental mistake. I elaction was a monumental mistake. I don’t think election was a monumental mistake. I don’t think we should have had a general election, I think we should have had another referendum, if we wanted to get Brexit done, we should have put the single issue to the pub“: have put the single issue to the public and said, "Do you want Boris johnson’s deal public and said, "Do you want Boris Johnson’s deal or don’t you? Let’s johnson’s deal or don’t you? Let’s deal with Johnson’s deal or don’t you? Let’s deal with that one issue and then move on". You have said that the number of times, I’m not suggesting you shouldn’t but I remember you saying that on this programme, in fact. What would... You are fact. what would... You are campaigning fact. What would... You are campaigning for the Labour leadership, obviously, what would the party look like and you? The same Corbyn policies or a different figurehead or would you move the labour Party figurehead or would you move the Labour Party in a different labour Party in a different direction, Labour Party in a different direction, more towards the centre, for example? I don’t think Labour for exampla? I don’t think labour needs to for example? I don’t think Labour needs to have some kind of existential crisis about who we are, we know who we are and we are proud of who we are but I don’t think at the last general election, first of all, as I said, we try to change the subject and we were not able to because Boris on the one side says, "Get Brexit done", and we have got three and half paragraphs of arts and we try to change the subject. 50 and we try to change the subject. So 7°“- and we try to change the subject. So you, going for and we try to change the subject. 50 you, going for the leadership, you say we know who we are but who would labour the under you with yellow what we would do is I think we would do something which is actually... Is what Britain wants and what Britain sees itself as being of a compassionate society where we look after one another. Something catastrophic could happen to anyone in this room and we will look after one another, whether you are ill and the NHS for look you, whether you lose your the NHS for look you, whether you lose yourjob and there will be a safety net for you. At the moment, the safety net has such huge holes in it that entire families. And end “P in it that entire families. And end up in food banks. We are disgusted as a nation, the number of people as a nation, the number of peopla who are as a nation, the number of people who are sleeping on the street. There is another way, it doesn’t have to be like this and we also need to be a nation where we give one another opportunities, where we help one another to do well and effectively, I think that is what Britain wants. They want to have an opposition and unfortunately, an opposition now, that they can believe in so when we say, "It doesn’t have to be this way, there’s another war, doesn’t have to be this way, there’s another way", we are credible, another war, we are credible, believable, another way", we are credible, believable, and they know that these appalling Tories are not the only “Y appalling Tories are not the only way that Britain needs to be. OK, a lot of way that Britain needs to be. 0K, 3 lot of hands way that Britain needs to be. OK, a lot of hands up way that Britain needs to be. 0K, 3 lot of hands up and I’m going to go around a few of you, the man in the black. If you are not willing to fast black. If you are not willing to cast off their shadow of Corbyn is, how ran you cast off their shadow of Corbyn is, how can you expect us to believe how ran you expect us to believe that you are how can you expect us to believe that you are listening to us? And this one in the orange. Can you see this one in the orange. (“an you see me question my this one in the orange. Can you see me question my candour panel see me? me question my randour panel see me? (“an you hear me? me question my candour panel see me? Can you hear me? That makes a change (“an you hear me? That makes a change for me as a Can you hear me? That makes a change for me as a black woman. I run for me as a black woman. I mn Sister Space, a for me as a black woman. I run Sister Space, 3 domestic violence Sister Space, a domestic violence organisation, a charity for African and Caribbean heritage women affected by domestic abuse. We are not visible, we are not... We are not visibla, we are not... We are not not visible, we are not... We are not listen to. I don’t think anybody sees the problem is that we are having. You talk about police and more police on the street. For us, that’s a problem because we go and report abuse and we would be asked questions like they don’t see a red mark and stuff like that and as for the windrush generation, they have the windmsh generation, they have stopped the windrush generation, they have stopped reporting abuse to us because they don’t want to be deported. Do you see us? Do you hear us? APPLAUSE The man in the glasses at the back, yes. I The man in the glasses at the back, yes. Ithink The man in the glasses at the back, yes. I think that one of the things jeremy Corbyn yes. I think that one of the things Jeremy Corbyn has done which I think jeremy Corbyn has done which I think was very bad is Jeremy Corbyn has done which I think was very bad is he has never agreed with what Boris was very bad is he has never agreed with what BorisJohnson or Theresa with what Boris johnson or Theresa May has ever with what BorisJohnson or Theresa May has ever said and I think that if you were made a leader, you should at least sometimes say, "Well, yeah, I should at least sometimes say, "Well, yeah, Iagree should at least sometimes say, "Well, yeah, I agree with you at this point", instead of saying, "No, I don’t agree", and obviously, Boris johnson must be I don’t agree", and obviously, Boris Johnson must be right sometimes. And johnson must be right sometimes. And the other Johnson must be right sometimes. And the other man in the glasses. In order to win an election, you need to appeal beyond your core vote, like... Boris managed to do this duﬂng like... Boris managed to do this during the election because he listen to people in the North of listen to peopla in the North of England and listen to people in the North of England and he had the pulse, he was able to understand the pulse of people wanting to get Brexit done. peopla wanting to get Brexit done. labour, if it people wanting to get Brexit done. Labour, if it wants to win, it needs labour, if it wants to win, it needs to start Labour, if it wants to win, it needs to start appealing to these people and appealing beyond their core vote if they ever want to win an election again. Let me hear if they ever want to win an election again. Let me hearfrom the man in again. Let me hear from the man in the check again. Let me hearfrom the man in the check shirt. I am going to bring “P the check shirt. I am going to bring up David Dimbleby because he’s done up David Dimblaby because he’s done a podrast up David Dimbleby because he’s done a podcast recently about Rupert Murdoch and I was wondering how labour is Murdoch and I was wondering how Labour is going to win an election labour is going to win an elaction when his Labour is going to win an election when his newspapers like the sun and the times are having such an effect on northerners, for example, manipulating them, let’s use the word brainwashing because that is really what it comes down to it with their headlights and so on, there’s no chance... Without their support. no chance. . . without their support. What, no chance. . . without their support. what, all of no chance... Without their support. What, all of them are? Well, the what, all of them are? Well, the vast majority What, all of them are? Well, the vast majority of papers and Rupert Murdoch particularly. We have got someone he who works for a Murdoch paper so you are perfectly placed to answer that question. I have never had so much rubbish! I mean, what a good excuse, the biggest Labour election defeat since 1935. It really is pathetic to blame the press. Honestly, I really is pathetic to blame the press. Honestly, Ithink really is pathetic to blame the press. Honestly, I think you are underestimating the intelligence and wit and savvy of the vast majority of citizens and I think Labour under of citizens and I think labour under jeremy Corbyn of citizens and I think Labour under Jeremy Corbyn and under almost any jeremy Corbyn and under almost any of the Jeremy Corbyn and under almost any of the leaders, and I’m sorry to say I include you with this at the moment, Emily, are making the same mistakes of underestimating the electric, pretending Labour is not electric, pretending labour is not in an electric, pretending Labour is not in an existential crisis. It could sink further in votes, there is about another 30 seats in the red wall that could easily go. I don’t even think they are particularly even think they are particularty listening to even think they are particularly listening to Londoners. I don’t know who they are listening to an Labour who they are listening to an labour apart from who they are listening to an Labour apart from themselves. There is one candidate, Lisa Nandy, who is doing candidate, Lisa Mandy, who is doing quite well and candidate, Lisa Nandy, who is doing quite well and getting a little bit of attention purely because she said one thing that was absolutely 100% one thing that was absolutely 10096 true, she one thing that was absolutely 100% true, she said Labour has got to true, she said labour has got to change or die true, she said Labour has got to change or die and that is the situation that change or die and that is the situation thatJeremy Corbyn has situation that jeremy Corbyn has landed situation thatJeremy Corbyn has [ended his party in. APPLAUSE landed his party in. APPLAUSE Mike, I [ended his party in. APPLAUSE Mike, I know you want to come in so the question was, do Londoners live in a political bubble and should in a political bubbla and should labour in a political bubble and should Labour listen to them if they want labour listen to them if they want to win an Labour listen to them if they want to win an election? What is your to win an election? what is your perspective, to win an election? What is your perspective, given your time in Durham? Clearly, there are really Durham? Clearty, there are really deprived Durham? Clearly, there are really deprived communities in London so for people to characterise London as for peopla to characterise London as a homogenous for people to characterise London as a homogenous group of people is a homogenous group of peopla is insulting and a homogenous group of people is insulting and inaccurate so the lady in tangerine at the front, we absolutely hear you and when I heard you say what you said, it absolutely hear you and when I heard you say what you said, itjust absolutely hear you and when I heard you say what you said, it just felt like the police force I you say what you said, it just felt like the police force Ijoined 39 years ago, not the one that I am proud to have years ago, not the one that I am proud to havejust years ago, not the one that I am proud to have just left, years ago, not the one that I am proud to havejust left, so again, I proud to have just left, so again, I offer a proud to havejust left, so again, I offer a conversation with you later, to see if we can resolve some issues to see if we ran resolve some issues there to see if we can resolve some issues there because it sounds terrible. There is a sense elsewhere in the country that legislation and policy country that lagislation and policy is country that legislation and policy is London—centric. I am going to is London-centric. I am going to give you two is London—centric. I am going to give you two examples. The bedroom tax, when it hit County Durham, meant that people moved out of meant that peopla moved out of perfectly meant that people moved out of perfectly serviceable houses and we perfectly serviceabla houses and we now perfectly serviceable houses and we now have empty streets because mums and single parents were living in and singla parents were living in solidly and single parents were living in solidly built, three—bedroom houses solidly built, three-bedroom houses that they solidly built, three—bedroom houses that they were going to be fined for living in. And that is because that sort of issue was very London—centric. That can also be a London-centric. That ran also be a social London—centric. That can also be a social mistake. I am going back a long way now to when Princess Diana died. It was very insulting to the rest of the country when all the commentators and all the noise was that the Queen had to come home to her people. She was in Balmoral. She is the Queen of Scotland. And this idea that somehow, the economy has to be based around London and there is a trickle—down effect is just not is a trickla-down effect is just not working. And is a trickle—down effect is just not working. And we have seen that. That is why there is the vote that we have just seen. People feel disenfranchised. But I want to make it clear that there will be plenty it clear that there will be planty of peopla it clear that there will be plenty of people feeling equally disenfranchised in London. Theresa? I don’t agree that Londoners live in a political bubble, but I do think a political bubbla, but I do think that a political bubble, but I do think that Labour needs to change fundamentally before it will be fit for government again. It needs to change because it needs an economic policy that adds up. It needs to change so that its Brexit policy respect the democratic vote of the country. And most crucially, it needs to deal with this disgraceful problem with anti—Semitism and problem with anti-Semitism and racism. problem with anti—Semitism and racism. Let me go around a couple of peopla racism. Let me go around a couple of people before I come to Trevor. The woman there? Theresa Villiers is talking about respecting the will of the people when just today, the the peopla when just today, the Welsh the people when just today, the Welsh assembly, and we have had the Scottish parliament and Stormont all Scottish partiament and Stormont all voting Scottish parliament and Stormont all voting against the Brexit Bill. And they are not being listened to. As a Londoner, I am they are not being listened to. As a Londoner, lam really they are not being listened to. As a Londoner, I am really sorry to the other nations of the UK. It is not London that is doing that to you. We all have to respect the fact that we have different views and try and think about in some way recognising that we exist as well here in London, and that it is not a bad thing to listen to us just because we are in London. The man in the red jacket? I we are in London. The man in the red jacket? Ijust wanted to say we are in London. The man in the red jacket? I just wanted to say that the Labour Party keep saying that the labour Party keep saying that Brexit the Labour Party keep saying that Brexit is not getting done at the end of the month and that it will take a long time to negotiate any deal, yet no one in the leadership contest is championing anything resembling Brexit as people voted. Emily Thornberry, you say there is no chance that a deal will be agreed before the end of the year, yet the chair of the trade committee of the EU has said it is possible, so why are you so negative about it? Let me get Trevor in. In the companies that I work for, we have a lot of people I work for, we have a lot of peopla who work I work for, we have a lot of people who work outside London. Firstly, I apologise to the person who said northerners are brainwashed, he didn’t really mean it. He was saying something quite different. Everybody outside London is a smart as everybody inside London and I had nothing to do with that remark. There is a separate point here. Not everybody in London is the same. when it everybody in London is the same. When it comes to listening, one of when it comes to listening, one of the things When it comes to listening, one of the things which struck me during the things which stmck me during the the election tells me that the the elaction tells me that the labour the election tells me that the Labour Party, which, by the way, I labour Party, which, by the way, I am still a Labour Party, which, by the way, I am still a member, Labour Party, which, by the way, I am stilla member, has Labour Party, which, by the way, I am still a member, has a problem with listening, was our great big ﬂagship with listening, was our great big flagship policy about broadband. I ﬂagship policy about broadband. I talked flagship policy about broadband. I talked to people both in London and talked to peopla both in London and outside talked to people both in London and outside London, and they literally all said the same thing. Did they say what the woman in the red dress set, rubbish? You’re going to give me free broadband? I can’t even pay my water and electricity bill, help me with that first! You’re going to give me free broadband so me with that first! You’re going to give me free broadband sol me with that first! You’re going to give me free broadband so I can give me free broadband so I ran tweak to give me free broadband so I can tweak to people that I am dying of tweak to peopla that I am dying of dehydration! tweak to people that I am dying of dehydration! —— I can tweet to dehydration! -- I ran tweet to people. That is dehydration! —— I can tweet to people. That is an example of Labour peopla. That is an example of labour not people. That is an example of labour not listening to people. That is an example of Labour not listening to its own people, but because we came up with a policy that even our own people couldn’t that even our own peopla couldn’t identify with. that even our own people couldn’t identify with. If I could make a quick point, we will see who comes out as leader but I don’t think our biggest problem is the leadership is a party. Our problem is the followership. This week, somebody pulled the Labour Party members and pulled the labour Party members and asked them, pulled the Labour Party members and asked them, who is the greatest labour asked them, who is the greatest Labour leader of the last 100 years? labour leader of the last 100 years? They walked Labour leader of the last 100 years? They walked straight past Blair, three election victories. They weren’t interested in Wilson, who gave us our anti—discrimination and gave us our anti-discrimination and Equal Pay Act. gave us our anti—discrimination and Equal Pay Act. They didn’t even think about Attlee, who created the NHS. 70% said Jeremy Corbyn, who NHS. 7096 said jeremy Corbyn, who gave us two NHS. 70% said Jeremy Corbyn, who gave us two lost elections and gave the Tories 60 seats that they have never won before. We hear you. Emily, be quick. There is a lot to say! I Emily, be quick. There is a lot to say! Iwill Emily, be quick. There is a lot to say! I will leave the issue about Brexit and I will come onto the fasting off of Brexit and I will come onto the casting off of the shadow of Corbynism. Frankly, I casting off of the shadow of Corbynism. Frankly, Ithink casting off of the shadow of Corbynism. Frankly, I think this is Corbynism. Frankly, Ithink this is part of Corbynism. Frankly, I think this is part of the issue. I think that if fasting part of the issue. I think that if casting a shadow of Corbynism means fasting off casting a shadow of Corbynism means casting off speaking from the heart, fasting off speaking from the heart, I don’t casting off speaking from the heart, I don’t cut that off. I don’t cast off the reinvigorating of the Labour off the reinvigorating of the labour Party and off the reinvigorating of the Labour Party and bringing people in. If we Party and bringing peopla in. Ifwe are genuine Party and bringing people in. If we are genuine and we are true and we are genuine and we are tme and we say what we are genuine and we are true and we say what we believe and we mean what we say, then I think people will we say, then I think peopla will start to we say, then I think people will start to come to us. But I do think that if we cannot deal with the issue of anti—Semitism in our own issue of anti-Semitism in our own Party. issue of anti-Semitism in our own party, then I issue of anti—Semitism in our own party, then I understand why people party, then I understand why peopla across party, then I understand why people across the country didn’t believe we could transform our economy. If we can’t even deal with an issue like that, then one can understand why that, then one ran understand why peopla found that, then one can understand why people found it difficult to follow peopla found it difficult to follow us and people found it difficult to follow us and believe in us. We have to speak on behalf of the whole speak on behalf of the whola country. 1.I speak on behalf of the whole country. U have been making for a country. 1.I have been making for a number of years country. U have been making for a number of years now is that we need to speak on behalf of the whole to speak on behalf of the whola country. In to speak on behalf of the whole country. In large cities, we are good at making our voice heard, but the smaller towns and cities and suburbs are not. One of the problems suburbs are not. One of the problams with suburbs are not. One of the problems with broadband was that it was practically the only policy that we offered to those smaller towns and cities across Britain. We need to be honest about the fact that it isn’t just the Tories who didn’t invest in infrastructure. When we were in infrastmclure. when we were in government infrastructure. When we were in government and when areas had been de—industrialised, we may have been tie-industrialised, we may have been good at de—industrialised, we may have been good at investing in schools and hospitals, but we were not dealing with the economy in those areas and we should never allow the situation to continue where if you are a youngster in a northern town, you say to your mum, sorry, mum, but there are very few opportunities here. I either have to suck it up or move to London and the south—east. move to London and the south-east. Our economy is move to London and the south—east. Our economy is entirely unbalanced and we need to have a radical look at this and find solutions for that. That is what the Labour Party should That is what the labour Party should be doing. We That is what the Labour Party should be doing. We have five years in opposition to sort this out. We will get a lot of rhetoric from the Tories and the Times. They say they were sort this problem out, but they won’t and we need to hold them to account. Emily Thornberry is accusing me of rhetoric? You have rolled in so many themes there. I was told I had to do it quickly! I was told I had 90 seconds. I never said 90 seconds. You spoke very fast about a tonne of things. You said, we believed in what we said and if people had only heard our passion peopla had only heard our passion and our people had only heard our passion and our belief, things could have been different. But your message was wrong. No. wrong. No. There are a couple of people with hands up? I think that peopla with hands up? I think that Emily is right people with hands up? I think that Emily is right that Labour are going Emily is right that labour are going to be in Emily is right that Labour are going to be in opposition for Emily is right that Labour are going to be in opposition forfive Emily is right that Labour are going to be in opposition for five years and there is not a lot they can do. and there is not a lot they ran do. But the and there is not a lot they can do. But the difference in the UK compared to somewhere like over here, on the left and right, people presume that if you don’t have parliamentary or legislative power, partiamentary or legislative power, you can’t parliamentary or legislative power, you can’t have a significant political impact in this country. Actually, if you look at France, you peopla from all Actually, if you look at France, you people from all different comic backgrounds and religious backgrounds and people from different communities who are pulling together and saying no, and they are getting results. They have got contentions from Macron and the pension reforms and that is the type of power that scares Boris Johnson, of power that stares Boris johnson, that of power that scares Boris Johnson, that scares Theresa here and scared that stares Theresa here and stared Thatcher that scares Theresa here and scared Thatcher in 1990 when she tried to introduce the poll tax. And this sort of pseudo— culture war that is sort of pseudo- culture war that is now being sort of pseudo— culture war that is now being laundered by the mainstream press across the country at the moment is pitting people at the moment is pitting peopla against at the moment is pitting people against each other so that we don’t come together and start to say no and fight for our communities and fight for these cuts. Everybody in this country, unless you are incredibly rich, is worse off as a result of ten years of Tory austerity. So regardless of who wins the election, people need to come together now and start resisting. Thank you very much. 0K, we have time for one quick question from Alastair Duncan. Should politicians be subject to lie detector tests? Theresa, I am assuming you are keen on this because your proposed terror reforms include plans to introduce detector tests. Would you be prepared to be to one? Absolutely I would. I can’t see a widespread use for these. Hang on, your government is suggesting introducing a widespread use for them with the new terror legislation, or had you forgotten that? That set of proposals is worthwhile, but in terms of introducing them in politic, I’m terms of introducing them in politics, I’m not sure there is a politic, I’m not sure there is a use for politics, I’m not sure there is a case for that. But I would be more use for that. But I would be more than rase for that. But I would be more than happy to case for that. But I would be more than happy to take one of those tests. That would be quite a Question Time, wouldn’t it? Let’s say that I thought for a moment. We have been using them since 2014. 11 forces used them with registered sex offenders and 4000 people have taken the test and over 350 have failed. the test and over 350 have failad. That is the test and over 350 have failed. That is about 8%. And they have That is about 896. And they have either gone That is about 8%. And they have either gone back to prison or had a change in their regime. The lie detector test puts pressure on people that they need to tell the truth. I am people that they need to tell the truth. lam not people that they need to tell the truth. I am not sure I am entirely truth. lam not sure I am entirely with the truth. I am not sure I am entirely with the man on the back row who has just spoken, but I do think there needs to be public discourse. You do need to see your MP. If the people in this audience haven’t been to see your MP personally, shame on you. Use that power to make sure they tmly Use that power to make sure they truly represent. One of my worries tmly represent. One of my worries is that truly represent. One of my worries is that whenever you get a political party is that whenever you get a political Party in. is that whenever you get a political party in, they don’t think they represent the country, when they actually do. I think a bit more Question Time love—in that you have Question Time love-in that you have seen tonight Question Time love—in that you have seen tonight might not go amiss. We have about A0 seconds left to answer have about 40 seconds left to answer this. have about A0 seconds left to answer this. Trevor? To be honest, I don’t see what the point would be. I am often more afraid of politicians like Donald Trump who tell me what like Donald Tmmp who tell me what they really like Donald Trump who tell me what they really think, because when I know what he really thinks, that is what scares me. what scares me. I think we shouldn’t be going around thinking that there is some truth that we can all is some truth that we ran all discover. is some truth that we can all discover. Politics is about disagreement, and most politicians tell you what they do think. Because you disagree, it doesn’t mean they have lied. Sarah? The problem is not that the politicians lie, the problem is that they believe their own BS. own BS. We don’t need to put Boris johnson to a lie own BS. We don’t need to put Boris Johnson to a lie detector test, johnson to a lie detector test, let’s Johnson to a lie detector test, let’s face it. He won’t face the media. He would rather hide in a freezer than talk to a journalist. One way in which he can be held to One way in which he ran be held to account One way in which he can be held to account and will not be able to run account and will not be able to mn away each account and will not be able to run away each week, the real lie detector test will be Prime Minister’s Questions each week, and we need to make sure we have a decent leader who takes him on and ran expose him decent leader who takes him on and can expose him as the liar that he ran expose him as the liar that he is. Emily got her can expose him as the liar that he is. Emily got her pitch in at the end! RR is up. Next week we are in Buxton in Derbyshire. The week after that, we will be in Hertfordshire. If you want to carry on this conversation, you can If you want to carry on this conversation, you canjoin Adrian conversation, you ranjoin Adrian Chihs conversation, you canjoin Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time extra time on Radio 5 live right now. Thank you to the panel, to the audience here for your questions and comments and to you at home for watching and listening. From Stoke Newington, bye—bye.