Tonight, we’re in Harpenden. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Robert Buckland, a barrister elected to Westminster in 2010, a former Prisons Minister and Solicitor General for England and Wales, now the Government’s Justice Secretary. Labour MP Stella Creasy, elected in 2010, a shadow minister under Ed Miliband, as a backbencher she’s led campaigns on payday loans and abortion rights in Northern Ireland. Former Energy Secretary in David Cameron’s coalition government, he is acting co—leader of the Liberal Democrats and rumoured to be running for the leadership — perhaps he’ll tell us tonight — Ed Davey. Rachel Shabi, author and journalist who specialises in political commentary and the Middle East. And an actor who appeared alongside ScarlettJohansson in the film Under The Skin, award—winning TV presenter and campaigner for disabilities, Adam Pearson. APPLAUSE. Welcome to the panel, to the audience here, and, of course, to you at home. Do join in the conversation on social media. We would love to hear what you’ve got to say. Let’s kick off with our first question, from Georgina Jones. Good evening. Is stopping the automatic release of terrorists enough, or is itjust postponing the problem 7 We have been talking about this all this week, since the attack in south London. Stella Creasy? Ifear you have a point, Georgina, actually. I think one of the things all of us are worried about is there is a ticking time bomb here. It’s not a lot of people, we need to keep that in proportion. And one of the things I find very frustrating about this situation we are in right now is that we have known about this for some time. In 2016, an independent review showed there was a problem in our prisons with people who had been radicalised, and we need to be clear it’s notjust Islamic radicalisation, there is far right radicalisation as well, expressed very real concerns that our prison service wasn’t able to cope, and it is now 2020 and we are suddenly faced with the idea of emergency legislation. We need to disrupt the behaviours and tactics that mean that people become radicalised. That’s the thing that’s going to keep us safe on our streets, as well as deal with those peopla in our prisons. It’s very important we talk about the sentences as well. There are people that have been convicted of terrorism offences, and some of those are what you might call low level terrorism offences. 50 actually their sentences aren’t very long. There are also people who go into prison for other offences, who then become radicalised in prison as well. And we need to be able to deal with all of these issues. Ijust worry, Robert, it’s really frightening for all of us to be in a position where we are trying to make legislation on the hoof to deal with such serious issues, when we’ve had the evidence about what needs to be done, when we have had 40% cuts in the Ministry ofJustice, on the people who are trying to deal with these problems, and actually, the work that needs to go on within communities to stop these problems in the first place has been cut as well. So, there will be this legislation about automatic release. And I think, you know, frankly, the idea that it’s about having a fight with the judges is a bit of a red herring. You need to have a fight with the Treasury, if we are really going to crack this. Because you can’t do public safety on the cheap. Actually, Robert Buckland, why has this... Why are you in a position of having emergency legislation? You have been in power for ten years. You, yourself, have been Solicitor General, you have been Prisons Minister, now you are just a secretary. been Prisons Minister, now you are justice secretary. Since 2014, you have been holding those positions. I mean, the reason you have got people like Sudesh Amman coming out on the streets is because you haven’t changed the law to stop it. In all that time. That’s not quite right, because the law has evolved over the last few years. There are sentences out there, extended, determinate sentences, where if a judge says an offender is dangerous, then the parole board is involved. What has happened here is that there is a group of offenders who are subject to automatic early release. That was a provision that was put in back in ‘05, and it therefore applies to a large number of offences. Now, as Stella says, it is a small group of people. But I can’t take any risks with public safety. But you known about the risk they posed to public safety for years. Why haven’t you done anything about it until now? But we have. Because while Stella is right to talk about the review that was done in 2016, there has been an immense amount of work that has been done in our prisons, with notjust my department, not as the Home Office, but the security services, the police, all working together, embedded in our prisons. It hasn’t stopped it though, has it? Well, I’ll say this, this is a very complex cohort. We are dealing with people who have resorted to this behaviour for a myriad of reasons. There are some who are genuinely ideological, and harbour deep—seated hatred. Who can be superficially compliant, but who then turn on those who try to help them. There are others, I think, that are capable of rehabilitation, just as other types of criminals in the criminaljustice process can be rehabilitated. But make no mistake, this isn’t easy work. Night and day, there is concentrated and coordinated activity by all the agencies to deal with the problem. And other countries come to us to learn from the experience we have had and to apply those rules and practices in their own countries. So, it’s not a case of us having done nothing. We are working as hard as we can to deal with this problem. But, as I said, I cannot risk any chance here that this sort of atrocity can be repeated. Hence the need for this emergency legislation next week. Ed? I agree with Georgina and I agree with Stella. This is just kicking the can down the road. It may well be that we need to get rid of early automatic release, I think I agree with that. But what happens when they are eventually released? And we got to use the time they are in custody to have really effective de—radicalisation programmes. A really effective rehabilitation programmes. The Government says it’s doing that, but it’s not. There are terrorist prisoners on a waiting list to get on these programmes, they are actually let out before they have got to the programmes. Because the Government have cut the resources appallingly. And Stella’s right, there are some people who go into prison and they are radicalised even more because of the way the prison systems are being run. Our prison systems are really overcrowded. People are locked up for 22 hours, in some cases. There are huge staff shortages. The management of the prisons, Robert, is in a shocking state, and you know that. Independent report after independent report shows that. And you are not going to deal with this problem unless you sort out the way that prisons are managed and you get in early. APPLAUSE. The man there, in the blue shirt? Isn’t this just an example of how politicians have been distracted by Brexit over the past three to four years and haven’t concentrated on what has happened domestically? The man in the front? Surely those convicted of terrorism in prison should be kept separate from other prisoners to avoid them being radicalised? The woman at the back? If we get rid of early release, shouldn’t we do it for other violent criminals and notjust people accused of terrorism offences? Extend to other people as well? Yes, the woman in front? To Stella’s point about arguing with the treasurer, aren’t we throwing an awful lot of money after a lot of bad... I suppose initiatives? And why aren’t we looking to see how the initiatives that have tried, and tested, and failed, why aren’t we looking to see what’s working and not? That a really good point. Because one of the other failings ofJustice Department — sorry, Robert, you’re on the oche here — one of the real big failures is they haven’t done those evaluations. So there’s a whole set of different approaches to radicalisation. We need to know what best practice is to keep the public safe. And you are not putting enough resources into that. I’m sorry, that is not right. We are constantly evaluating the programmes we use, because the threat shifts. As Stella has mentioned, far right extremism, absolutely correct. But it evolves. And therefore, we are trying to be as fleet of foot as possible to deal with that evolving threat. What is happening to the review of Prevent, for example? Which is the policy put in place to try to deter people from doing this in the first place. When are we going to see that review? We are working on a number of reviews at the moment. But that one in particular? Including Prevent. Which, frankly, if we are not constantly reviewing the programme, I think we are failing in our duty. And notjust Prevent, it is also the protection agencies, the multi—agency reviews. We’ve got to get those right. I’ve ordered a review into that. But, of course, I can order myriads of reviews. The reality is that we are dealing with a particularly complex group of people. The issue of separation was raised, a very important point. Now, in some cases, that can work very well. But there is a danger that if we put all of the extremists in one unit, we are creating a college of extremism. I’m sorry, Robert... We have to take a very modulated approach. Robert, you have specialist units. A special case. Yes, we do. You have specialist units for these people and they are empty. No, no, they are not empty. Yes, they are. You haven’t put the resources. That is not true. This point about resources... Hang on, are they empty or aren’t they? No, they are not. There are a number of individuals in the separation units. We have spare capacity. But we don’t just shove people in there for convenience. We have to look at each case to make sure it is right thing to do. But, Robert, I know this government doesn’t like experts very much. But the fact is that you haven’t listened to any experts across the field. Whether it is in the criminal justice system or whether it is people with expertise in counter extremism or counter radicalisation. And chief among them, I have to say, you talk about not wanting to take risks. You are the risk. This government is the risk. APPLAUSE Really? We have seen 40% cuts to the prison and criminaljustice system. Cuts to prison services, cuts to prison officers, cuts to policeman, cuts to legal aid, cuts to the Crown Prosecution Service. What did you think would happen when you savaged the system to that extent? So, of course, this is a problem of funding. And it is expensive. Law and order, public safety, costs money. You have to be willing to invest in it. And clearly this government is not. APPLAUSE I agree with everything that has been said. I think it leads into the gentleman’s point that we have all been distracted for the past three and a half years, and everything else appearsjust completely flown off the radar. And I’m afraid now it’s coming back to bite, and it’s biting incredibly hard. And when it comes to the idea of countering extremism, I think if you are doing it in prison, the horse has already bolted. And we need to deal with it at a really early, embryonic stage, and find out how they have been radicalised on the outside, to deal with that. What is causing it, what are the social factors? And speak to those as well. Because people just get more radicalised in prisons. They don’t help, it makes it worse. And if you leave them in prison is longer, they are just going to have more time to be radicalised. And I think we have got the horse and the cart the complete wrong way round with prison rehabilitation. Yes, the woman there? APPLAUSE. Yes, sorry... A lot of these children grow up with a diet in their childhood of hatred. So, I’m just thinking, what are our values? What are you trying to teach them? Just equality and tolerance? Or is there something much deeper? Like the opposite of hatred is love, faithfulness, justice, integrity, what’s right. What are your values? What values do you want to teach these children who have had a diet of hatred, probably quite a lot of their childhood? In fact, we don’t know that about them all, what kind of childhood they had, or whether they had a diet of hatred or not. But I take your point. Yes, the woman there? So, I want to ask, really, what makes people feel disenfranchised in the first place which means, you know, before they even get to the prisons, before that even happens. It used to be, under Labour, that they had in communities where this might be a problem, they had community officers that would come and talk to people and it was in the policing. And that’s gone. And so now we’ve got the far right happening, and you’ve got to wonder why that is certainly rising again. You know, it’sjust the cuts, really, I think. The man in the blue shirt there. Convicted terrorists have alienated themselves from civilised society. They are rightly in prison. I agree with the initiative that has been taken, that they serve their full term. But at the very least, the society must be satisfied that, before they’re let out on the streets, 3 full risk assessment has been made that they are able and capable to come on the streets without being a risk to the public. Let me take one more before I move on, the man at the back in the glasses. Yes, you, sir. I’d like to say, do the panel feel there are three contributory factors? One, the increased mental health that goes on in prison, two, the disproportionate number of ethnic minorities, people that are in prison. And the severe cuts within the services, especially up north in England, which have been impoverished for so long. When will this government wake up? Do they not have a conscience? All right, OK, I’m going to take one more. I support stopping the early release, but I don’t have confidence about the de—radicalisation programmes, and so, for me, it’s not enough, you know, I think they should stay there, personally. So, Georgina, you were asking whether this was just postponing the inevitable, so you think they should be locked up indefinitely, these people? Is that what you’re suggesting? Yeah, probably it is, yeah. I mean, if someone is planning to take someone’s life, then I think they lose their right to have a free—living life. Let me just ask one thing, because you’ve been getting a bit of a battering, but I want to ask a serious question — we know that there is one person who is in prison at the moment and whose release is coming up in a number of weeks, in three weeks’ time, and you’re trying to get this emergency legislation through to stop him coming out. If you succeed, by my calculation, he will be in prison until about this time next year, so then what happens? This is the question, and the sentencing process, obviously, is confined to the sentence passed by the judge, and that might be an element of custody, and then release on licence, we think the Parole Board should be involved to do the risk assessment, but there is a longer term issue, and if you remember, we had the big debate about control orders, the Tpims introduced when Ed and I were in government together. Big arguments about whether that is right, bearing in mind is no conviction, offence to attach those orders too. The management of extremism in the community is something, I think, we’re going to have to grasp now. And we’ve tried, in the past, with indeterminate sentences for public protection, which I don’t think worked, because I think the judgments that we asked judges to make were rather, frankly, crude, and have resulted, frankly, in injustices. And I think therefore what we need to do is calmly revisit that concept, but develop it in a way, as we have done with mental health issues, actually, and the way in which we deal with people with a mental health problem in the criminaljustice system, and work out a system where we can assess risk, protect the public, but also balance that against the rule of law, and those due process issues that do matter and make us a civilised society, make us better than the terrorists, make us different and mean that we have something that is worth defending against people who seek to divide us, murder us or injure us. 0K, Robert, thank you. APPLAUSE. I’m going to move on, because we have a lot of questions on a whole variety of subjects, so I’m going to try to get to as many as I can, but I just want to say get to as many as I can, but I just want to say where we will be next week, which is Dundee, and will bejoined by the crime writer Val McDermid, and the following week will be in Weymouth with the chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland. Howard Davies, and political commentator, train enthusiast and former Tory Cabinet Secretary Michael Portillo. So if you want to be in the audience, call or go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions there. Do come along if you are in the area for either of those programmes. Right, let’s move on. As I say, a lot of topics I want to try and get through. Daniel Warr. The announcement this week that fossil fuel cars will be banned in 2035, what is the Government going to do to incentivise us to change cars? Right, well, Robert, we have had you speaking a lot, so I will go around the panel for a minute. Ed, what do you think should be done to incentivise us to buy electric cars? Well, I want to make sure there are a lot cheaper, and that’s why the Government is actually not being ambitious enough. The Liberal Democrats want that ban to take place from 2030, like many other countries. If you look at what is happening in the Netherlands, in Sweden, in Denmark, in Ireland, in Germany, they’re all looking at 2030. Norway has actually gone for 2025. They’ve got an awful lot more electric cars than we have at the moment. Yes, because they’ve actually incentivised things. But the point I’m making is we need to get these manufacturers to produce the electric cars and the ultralow emission vehicles much cheaper, and if we give them that earlier timetable, as other countries are doing, they’ll all be forced to produce them on a mass scale that will mean there is a much greater choice, the price will come down. When I was Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, we did that with offshore wind. We helped create an industry by bringing factories to Hull, which created huge amounts of green jobs, but it also helped build the supply chain, to make it more competitive. We saw the cost of offshore wind come down dramatically, so we’ve got a lot more green power. We need to do those sorts of systems in transport, so you can be driving much cheaper, cleaner vehicles. Daniel, what would you like to see happen? Well, basically, I don’t think we’ve got the infrastructure at all for it. APPLAUSE. I think it’s unachievable, because on the 1st of January 2036, you’re still going to be able to drive your petrol car, they’re not going to stop you going to a petrol station, so it’s going to make no difference to climate change. This is all about new cars, isn’t it? That’s right, it’s about new cars, and people can’t afford to buy new cars, because they are so expensive. Therre so much more expensive than your standard diesel or petrol cars. Can I reassure Daniel? Briefly, Ed. I want to let other people on the panel talk as well. They will be able to be charged overnight at your own home using much cheaper overnight electricity, so in many ways we can do it... You are talking about the cost ofjust buying the car. Where is the cheaper electricity coming from? The thing is, this isjust tinkering around the edges, isn’t it? You know, looking at the climate crisis is the most urgent and pressing issue of our time. We don’t have long to deal with it. And they kind of changes that we are talking about, you’re asking about how we can incentivise people. Well, we do need to do that, and that needs state intervention. It needs state—directed policy to make it easier in all kinds of ways for people to make greener choices, and I think that the blueprint that the Labour Party came up with, the green new deal, is precisely that. It is a state intervention, all kinds of things, it is also 3 jobs creation programme, and whether that’s like gigafactories making battery packs for electric cars or wind turbine factories in the north—east or metal reprocessing plants or carbon capture factories, whatever it is, that’s the scale of what we need, and that has to be a state—directed thing. We can’tjust expect people to switch without providing that kind of level of intervention. OK, so, Robert, how are you going to incentivise people to change cars? I mean, there is at the moment a grant knocking 3500 off the price of a car, as I understand it. You are phasing that out next month. Yeah, but we’re also introducing... Are you going to go ahead with that phasing down next month? What we are changing is the availability of infrastructure and actually making sure that we have more charging points. Hang on, the point Daniel was making is that these cars are very expensive. The Government at the moment has a subsidy to help people buy the cars. You’ve just made this announcement that were all going to have to buy new cars from 2035, they have to be electric, and you’re going ahead with phasing out the subsidy next month. Because we think there’s a better way of doing it, which is actually... One of the barriers, I think, a lot of people feel about electric vehicles is the ease by which they can be recharged. Well, cost is the one that Daniel mentioned. But I think, by scaling up the infrastructure, it means that more people will start to buy electric cars, and without scale of demand, then the price starts to come down. I think that is the way we’re going to do this. We’ve got 15 years... I think you’ve described... With respect, you characterise the Government’s approach to this issue. There is plenty of direct intervention that is going on every year when it comes to the incentivisation of... Which won’t be the scale that we need. And in fact our record as a country, and all of us have played our part in this, is second to none when it comes to the move to renewable energy. The next challenge is transport, because transport is now the bulk of those carbon emissions, which is why I think it’s right that we’ve brought forward to that target, and I think that by scaling up the infrastructure, we will start to see that change not just to battery but to hydrogen, to a range of different sources of renewable energy, which I think is a much more sustainable way of going forward. You know, we could be ambitious and bring forward the target even more, but we have to get the balance right, we have to respect the fact that there are people out there who need to have that financial access to these vehicles. I believe the proposals that we’ve come up with strike the appropriate balance. Just so I’m clear, because there’s been talk about the fact that even though this grant was going to be scrapped, it might be reintroduced in the Budget, but that’s not going to happen, the subsidy for buying electric cars, given your announcement we are all going to be buying them, that subsidy is going? Well, I can’tjudge what is going to happen in the Budget, that is for my colleague the Chancellor, but what I can say is that I think it’s true infrastructure improvements that we really start to see a scaling up of electric vehicles. Adam. It is one thing saying all this, but we don’t have the infrastructure and saying, oh, you can charge your car at home really easily, I can charge most of my mobile devices at home really easily. The fact is the battery runs out and what then? How many charging terminals do we need for how many cars that are going to be kind of on the roads? Pushing the price down is one thing, and a market led approach is great, but they don’t always work. I refused to believe that companies who make electric cars are going to take a massive hit on that profit margin, because the Government has asked them to do it. So once again, these are wonderful ideas, but how many electric terminals do we need? How many electric cars do we expect there to be on our roads by 2030? What do we expect the price to be by then, and how accessible is it going to be for people, and is it a cheaper alternative to the traditional fossil fuel method? And if it isn’t, why would anyone in their right mind go for it? There is a lot of hands up, the woman in the glasses. As well as focusing on electric vehicles, surely we need to sort out public transport. Around here, the buses have been cut, from the villages sometimes there’s only one day. The trains for Harpenden particularly, there are fewer trains than we were, so surely we need to focus on that as well. The woman with glasses in the front. Yes, you. I’m just wondering, I know we’re all trying to move towards electric cars, but then what do we do with the batteries? Isn’t that another environmental problem that you have to deal with? The man in the bluejacket. APPLAUSE. 0h, hi. Yeah, one thing we do know is the number of trees that we need to plant, which I think is 1.5 billion, and I think that we are planting about 25% of what we need at the moment. Could we do more there? 0K, let me hearfrom the man in the greyjacket, yes. There’s lots of pressure on us as individuals to make changes our lifestyles, but when will major companies and corporations be held accountable for their actions? OK, you mean in terms of polluting? Yeah. Stella? We have all got to move to electric cars at some point, surely. Everyone is piling into the Government on this, and we can talk about the subsidy and the timing, but eventually this has to happen, doesn’t it? Well, also, look, there’s a cost to all of us of not doing is, and I speak as somebody who, probably like a lot of you, bought a diesel car thinking I was doing the right thing, yes, madam, we both thought we were doing the right thing! We don’t have time to wait. We know that the climate emergency is real, and we know that transport is part of it. The lady at the back is absolutely right, it’s notjust about electric cars, it’s also about the fact that people have to have cars because transport in this country is so poor. You have to join the dots together. That’s where good active government can get involved in this. I don’t know if we’re going to go on to talk about Glasgow and the climate change conference, it’s where you do need the leadership, and time after time, I have to be honest, this government has not been there. They’ve said, oh, we have this market led approach, but they’ve not been active players in that market, and that’s the way to make it work. We need to have a scrappage scheme for cars, because it isn’t just about new cars, it is about getting the old polluting cars off the roads. But we also need those subsidies, and we need to incentivise the gigafactories that make the factories that make the cars cheaper, because I looked up how much it would cost for an electric car and saw the number of dots at the end of it, you know, these things are all possible, but they require planning by government to say, actually, were notjust going to wait and see what happens and hope that people can find the cash to make this happen, we’re going to do this actively. Because if we don’t, not just the cost to our economy, but they cost to our breathing. I would say to people, I represent a London constituency, and when people are concerned about environmental issues, I say to them, leave London for a couple of days, then blow your nose and realise what your breathing in and what we have to change. We don’t have time to mess around, we have to do all of this, because all of us will pay the price for a government that is going to sit back and wait for you to pick up the tab. With that charming image in mind, can Ijust ask, does anyone on the panel have an electric car? You do? And how is it working for you? I love it. But I live up the road. There is one charging station in all of Harpenden. And there is always a bunch of electric vehicles queueing, waiting to charge. So it’s not about scaling up the infrastructure. The infrastructure needs to be there already. There are 18,000 registered private EV owners in Hertfordshire. And you can count on just two hands the number of chargers there are. So it’s utterly ridiculous. My car is six years old. It’s not new technology. If you bought a new car, if you bought a new diesel car, but you had to drive way out of your way to go and fill it with diesel, you wouldn’t buy it. the affordability. Mine was very affordable. But there was nowhere to charge it. And I live in a block of flats, I don’t have a driveway to charge it on. How many of you here are commuters? A lot of it is notjust about having a car or having a bus service, it’s about where you want to travel and why you want to travel, and making it easier for people to work from home so that we are travelling where we need to. And if we could get our train service working properly... APPLAUSE Let’s not make this a free for all. Let me move on. I’m going to take another question from Tanya Powell—Jones. Tanya, whereabouts are you? Has impeachment helped or hindered Donald Trump’s election campaign, should we care? Do you care, Tanya? I do care, yes. And what is your view? I think it has helped. It plays into the idea of him versus them for his voters. And what makes you care about it, why do you think we should care here? Because I think it devalues the impeachment. That wasn’t the purpose of what it was meant to be. If it can be used like this as a political tool, what does that mean going forward? Adam? what is your view on this? I think anything you throw at 3 Donald Trump at this pointjust isn’t going to stick. At this point, he is a mud monster, and just throwing more mud at him will make him stronger. I have no idea how he survived impeachment. Well, it’s the number of Republicans in the Senate, I think, is how he survived it. It was 3 numbers game in the end, wasn’t it? Yeah, I guess that is true. But it’s just... I don’t know, it hasjust given him more momentum going into the real election that is happening. And it’s just really baffling to me. I don’t know how he got in the first place, even. Do you think it matters to us here? Well, we are going to be negotiating with whoever wins this 2020 election on a trade deal. And back in April, Barack Obama said it could take up to ten years to negotiate such a trade deal with the US. And there has been research done that, on average, any country entering trade negotiations with the US, on average, takes five years. I mean, Donald Trump is much more bullish about it. Yes, exactly, so it will likely be more than that. One and a half years negotiating, three and a half implementation. And so, yes, I think it does matter. I think the individual in the White House that we are negotiating with once we leave the EU properly, at the end of December, absolutely matters to our country. 0K. Ed? Sorry, I’lljust come to Ed and then I will come to you. I think it may have improved his re—election chances, and I deeply regret that. Because we should care about it. Because this man in the White House is one of the biggest blocks to action on things like climate change. This man in the White House is actually, with his foreign policy, created great instability in places like North Korea, and the Middle East. As a progressive politician, I find his approach to women, to Muslims, to Mexicans, quite outrageous. I hope he loses in November. I think that would be a real step forward for the world, and for those of us who care about the rights of ordinary people. APPLAUSE Do you think that is likely? I think it’s very difficult to tell at the moment. I think we are still waiting to see who the Democrat choice for President is. I hope they choose someone who can beat Donald Trump, because that is in the interests of everyone, the rest of the world. Rachel? Well, it might have helped him, but it was still the right thing to do. You know, because he did abuse the power of his office, and it was corrupt. So, the Democrats were right to pursue it. I don’t think they could have ignored it. But what we sawjust now, that was not a trial, with the Senate. A trial with no witnesses? No documentation? APPLAUSE And they had John Bolton, Republican, willing to testify. Saying, hey, by the way, I want to testify, I’ve got something to say about this. Another way of looking at it is that is their system, and they went along with their system, this is the result you got. Well, they went along with their system, and I think that is to their shame. The fact that they were prepared to have a trial that wasn’t a trial, I think everybody can see that, everybody can see what happened there. And does it matter? Yes, of course it does. I think for people who are progressives, leftists or liberals, there aren’t that many reasons to be cheerful right now, globally. So we are all watching the US election, you know, and kind of willing the Democrats to just get it together and win this time. The man in the front, in the purple tie? We can say that is the system, but we are also dependent on the integrity of the individuals. Donald Trump did abuse his office in the way that he was accused of. Mitt Romney recognised that, and with some integrity voted for impeachment. And the rest of the Republicans said, in effect, yes, he may be a bully, but he’s our bully, he is on our side, so we are going to support him. That’s what’s going on. The woman in the green dress, green top? I’m worried that our Prime Minister is beginning to resemble the man in the White House in his treatment of minorities, but also press freedom, and how he treated journalists the other day and refused them entry into the briefing. Right. APPLAUSE We may come onto that. I know that is a thing that a number of you have talked about. Let’s stick with Donald Trump for a moment. Stella, has the impeachment helped or hindered his campaign? Should we care? Yes, I think we should care, because when you normalise politics without rules, it has consequences for making it look more acceptable in other parts of the world. I mean, I think you are right, sir, who would have thought a couple of years ago that Mitt Romney would appear to be a progressive hero? But he did the right thing. He said what he thought was right and he will take the consequences in the Republican movement. We are in a politics right now, there are very many tactics in American politics that are being imported into British politics in terms of how people campaign, in terms of people’s arguments about whether experts and expertise matter. I think we should all be worried, because it is driven in America so much by money. It’s not driven by democracy. And actually we are seeing that in the Democrat movement as well. What I worry about is that once somebody has been able, essentially, to get away with it once, why not do it again? And why not then, in this country, start saying, well, you know what, actually, if in America people don’t accept having all the press there and difficult press scrutiny, why not do that here? If it’s OK to not have clarity about what you are doing with your Russian oligarchs in America, why not do that in the UK? It becomes a very slippery slope. All of us, as politicians, should always be slightly uncomfortable that we are being scrutinised. That is a good thing. I don’t think that Donald Trump feels that tonight, and that is a bad thing. APPLAUSE Is that your view? Is that the Government view? I do agree with Stella about the sense of discomfort. I think that is absolutely the place that all of us need to be. The great thing about our system is that, you know, I can’t sit in an ivory tower. I have to come and answer to colleagues at questions, and indeed to make statements, and be held accountable upon that. I think whilst I’m not going to get into the weeds of the American campaign, I think their system is, should we say, a rather interesting one. In that, in a genuine attempt to try and get separation of powers right, the executive power of the President does mean that he or she is rather remote, I think, from what goes on day—to—day on the hill. But what has happened in American politics is that the tradition of working across the aisle, which was a huge part of the United States Senate for most of its history, has gone. We have heard about Mitt Romney. He is a real throwback to a past that is within living memory of many of us, when the great men and women of the Senate actually put their hands across the aisle and worked together for the United States of America. Now, that has vanished. And a lesson for us, I think, is this. In all the partisan hurly—burly we have had over the last few years, I think all of us need to look in the mirror, as politicians here in the UK, and remember that there is so much that unites us. We are all trying to get to the same goal. We might disagree about the means by which we do it, but we are, and should be, men and women of honour and, yes, trust. Now, that’s been a really difficult thing for a lot of people recently. That sense of discomfort is what I think we need to hold onto as we learn the lessons of some of the extreme politics that we are seeing, notjust in the USA, but also closer to home. Do you feel that sense of discomfort in terms of doing a deal with Donald Trump, then? If you are in some discomfort about what you have just witnessed? Today, with the impeachment? I think the Government has shown its independence of mind on issues like Huawei. We are far from assuming the position of supplicant... I’m not suggesting that, I’m talking about the discomfort. Or mindlessly following on... Look, you have to deal with the President of the United States, whoever they happen to be. The office is the office. Now, I’ve got my personal views. Ooh, let’s hear them. Come on! LAUGHTER. We want to hear those, don’t we, ladies and gentlemen? APPLAUSE. Come on, Robert. Cards on the table, what are your personal views? Do you feel any discomfort about Donald Trump and Boris Johnson being so pally? Hang on, hang on. Well, I think apart from the hair colour, I do not see that much communality between a classical scholar... Are you saying BorisJohnson and Donald Trump have got the same hair colour? I think BorisJohnson might have a word with you about that. I do think there are some lazy comparisons which are not borne out by the evidence. What I want to see in the United States is the Democratic Party organising its caucuses efficiently, so that we know what the results are going to be, and that the candidate who they produce will provide a proper contest, rather than something that will be a rollover. I mean, Trump has confounded the rules of politics in a way that perhaps some of us, I’ll admit I’m quite a conventional sort of person in the way that I do my politics, find difficult and challenging. But elections are elections. We have to work with whoever is democratically elected in the White House. You call it a challenging, Robert? Where do you start with the way he treats minorities, treats women, what he’s done. He nearly caused World War III with Iran. That is not difficult and challenging. He abused his office of State to be able to pick on a political rival. This isn’tjust bad manners. This is terrible politics, should be called out as such. And again, ourforeign policy was distinct from that of the Trump White House in that we do support the nuclear deal, and have done our best to try to invoke the dispute resolution mechanisms, because we believe, when we signed treaties, we believe in due process of international law. That is the United Kingdom actually having a distinct position from that of the administration... You rolled out the red carpet for him to come to this country because we are weak in the world right now, rather than strong enough to stand up and tell him when he has got things wrong. And we are all demeaned by it as a result. OK, I think this could go on for some time. There is another question I want to get in, if I may, from Naomi Jamboretz. Have I pronounced your surname correctly? You have, thank you. Does the panel believe that I am appropriately dressed for this occasion? LAUGHTER APPLAUSE Right. Now, for those of you who are not sitting around Naomi, she is wearing an off the shoulder dress. Which I assume, Naomi, is a reference to your colleague, who was wearing an off the shoulder dress in the House of Commons, and had quite a response, not a favourable one, and social media. And the papers were all over it as well. ﬂ I presume you think, yes? I think I would like my daughter to be I presume you think, yes? I think I would like my daughter to bejudged would like my daughter to be judged on the would like my daughter to bejudged on the merits of what she says, and not what she wears. Why are we going not what she wears. why are we going there with not what she wears. Why are we going there with this? Because we asked it. We nearty there with this? Because we asked it. We nearly had World War III in it. We hearty had World War III in Iran, we have it. We nearly had World War III in Iran, we have a climate emergency... You might not like it, but if these are the questions the audience asks, that is the purpose of the programme, let answer it. If it was Gok Wan challenging her on what she Gok Wan challanging her on what she was Gok Wan challenging her on what she was wearing, she might be worried about it, but it was Piers Morgan, come on! Women can’t win, there was a shoulder in Parliament, it isn’t a a shoulder in Partiament, it isn’t a big deal. a shoulder in Parliament, it isn’t a big deal. Stella is absolutely right. Aggressive politicians have to stand up from some of the nonsense we get from right—wing commentators. Jo Swinson got more comments about her earrings than some of thing she was saying. That’s outrageous. I think women are held to a different standard from men and it’s completely wrong. My male colleague was the first MP to an open necked shirt, without a tie. It didn’t really make a headline. And that is the way men are treated in that is the my men are treated in different that is the way men are treated in different ways from women and I think it has got to stop. There is a serious point here? There is an absolute serious point here. And I think this is what happens when we put public opinion and procedure above policy. And as you said, someone showed a bit of shoulder in the House of Commons, I don’t care. Do I agree with what she’s saying? Absolutely. Is what she’s saying of merit, and is she a damned good MP and a woman of character? Absolutely. By all means, wear what you want, I have one of those, a size six, I’m glad didn’t wear it now, we would have had the same thing on! Yes, the woman there. I personally think it was inappropriate. For example, for this evening we were all asked to dress smart—casual. Were you?! I didn’t know that! That’s interesting. Yes, we were. We were. So I think there’s a slight hypocrisy there, and if I’m looking at the ladies on the panel, you’ve all got... Well, two of you have gotjackets on, and you’ve got a smart dress which is buttoned up to here. Why didn’t you wear anything like Tracy Brabin? I didn’t wear a cold shoulder top literally for that reason, because I get cold shoulders! Hang on, in fairness... Why aren’t you asking the men why they chose...? Hang on, let mejust make a point. Because Tracy Brabin did say she wasn’t expecting to make a comment at the despatch box, so she was actually going out that evening, so she was slightly taken by surprise, but nonetheless was defending her right to wear what she liked. But that’s interesting, so you, as a woman, you’re not supporting her right to wear pretty much what she wants. Because that is irrelevant to what she says. No, I think it’s important, what she said, but I do think that there’s a certain dress code. If she’s leading, she should lead by example, and I don’t think... I don’t think the off the shoulder was appropriate, because it was too much off the shoulder, it looked like a disco outfit and not like a politician. 0K, there’s quite a few women with their hands up, so let’s hear some more. Yes, the woman in the glasses at the back. Yes, it’s fine for women to wear what they want, but are we now saying it’s OK to tear up the dress code and then, if we do that, can we blame schoolchildren who breach uniform codes? You know? There’s not a uniform code, though, in the House of Commons. I know, but is there a dress code in the House of Commons? Because if we say people can wear anything they want to wear anywhere, then that means we are tearing up the dress code anyway and then there shouldn’t be a uniform code as well for the children. That means they’re allowed to flout uniform codes in school, if the adults believe they can actually flout dress codes as well. 0K, lots of women with their hands up, let me have a quick scout around the room. Yes, the woman there with the brown hair, yeah. Me? Yes, I can’t see what you’re wearing! But I know you’ve got brown hair. I think it’s so important to mention this, because it shows an overarching theme of culture that we have today, where sexual harassment is so normalised. I’m 21, and it’s so unusualfor me to come across someone who hasn’t had to deal with some form of sexual harassment, and I was going to mention the Pretty Little Thing advert that got banned recently. Which advert are you referring to? Pretty Little Thing? Oh, it was criticised for being overly sexualised. Yeah, basically, but I watched it, and a lot of people 18—24, which is what it was aimed at, will be dressing like that, especially for things like festivals and things like that. So if people are told that it’s wrong to dress like that, it normalises people sexual harassing people who are dressed like that. And it’s really not OK. And I think people mentioning... I can’t remember her name, but the politician that had the shoulder... Tracy Brabin. Tracy Brabin, that had the shirt off the shoulder, itjust shows an overarching culture that we have today. 0K, two women with their hands up, then I’ll come back to the panel. The woman in the red top. While women are still underrepresented in politics, is it really fair to be focusing so much on what they are wearing over what they’re saying? What image is that giving to young people who want to go into politics, that your work is going to be undervalued based on what you’re wearing? 0K, yes, and the women just behind you. Hi. Yes, as the lady further down said that Tracy’s dress looked like a disco outfit, as a mother of two young girls, I very much hope that they will grow up to express themselves as they feel, and actually I make many trips to the supermarket with my daughter dressed in her tutu, with her leopard print onesie, and that’s absolutely fine, because I think, actually, dress code, yes, there has to be some sort of boundaries, but actually people should be able to express themselves how they wish. And it shouldn’t be judged at all. You wanted to come in? Well, there is actually a dress code in Parliament, but it’s only for men, because Parliament hasn’t thought about the fact that there might be women there. Frankly, Tracy could have been wearing a wimple and someone would still comment on what you’re wearing. I’m sure they would comment if she was wearing a wimple! I promise you, one of the things that I’m going to do when I get back from maternity leave, and actually what I’m wearing, madam, is a shirt so I can breast—feed, that’s why I’m wearing what I’m wearing, is to campaign to make misogyny a hate crime alongside all the other forms of abuse that women and men get so that we treat women equally, because it’s a thing that’s tackled street harassment. When half of all young girls in this country tell us they’re frightened to walk our streets, we have bigger challenges to deal with than a bare shoulder in parliament or the fact that Piers Morgan is offended by it. APPLAUSE. I mean, Rachel, what is interesting, or what struck me anyway, because I’ve asked exclusively women for a response to this, and not everyone is of the same mind, we’ve got at least two women here who don’t support the idea of Tracy wearing a dress like that. Well, that’s allowed, I believe. I’m just making the point. You know, maybe that will get banned, who knows? Give it time! But I think what’s interesting, a woman at the back made that point about how difficult, how underrepresented women are in politics as it is, and I think that’s really important, because this is just one more way ofjudging women and, you know, young people looking at this play out, and the level of criticism heaped upon a woman for her dress choices in parliament are going to think, you know, added to the misogyny and the harassment and the abuse that women get, disproportionately, and black women most of all, would just put them off getting involved. Why on earth would you want to sign up for that? So I think it’s really important that we don’t focus on these issues and do actually talk about policy and experience and capabilities and talent instead. 0K, since the question was asked, we’re going to focus on it for one more person, Robert. I was in the chamber when Tracy came in to make a point of order, and you know what was remarkable about it was that she’s got quite a nasty issue with her ankle, and it’s totally bound up at the moment, I think she might have had some surgery on it, and she hopped to the despatch box to make a point of order because she was determined to come in and have his say, despite the fact, you know, her mobility was quite significa ntly restricted. And frankly, I was more interested in that than what she was wearing. She was wearing the equivalent of black tie, if it was me, I might have come in wearing black tie, if I was going on to a dinner. Get over it, move on, and let’s focus upon what politicians of whatever gender, whatever sex are talking about, not what they’re wearing. 0K. APPLAUSE. I’m going to get one more question in. We’ve just got time to do it, and it’s something that’s been touched upon already but there are an awful lot of questions about it, so I wanted to raise it quickly in the time we have left, from Stephanie Russon, Stephanie. Should the Prime Minister speak to all of the press orjust the ones he likes? Right. 0K. APPLAUSE. Rachel? Yes, this government is quite worrying with the press, isn’t it? It has a really weird relationship to the press. We saw it pop up in the general election campaign as well, the Government, aside from spreading a misinformation campaign, which is why it is so weird to hear you talking about trust, Robert, besides that, they seem to not like the BBC’s undue attention on things like a toddler being forced to sleep on the floor of a hospital for a lack of beds, to which I would suggest may be, you know, put some money into the NHS so that you avoid having toddlers forced to lie on the ﬂoor. This was during the election campaign. Rather than getting upset when the price does itsjob and draws attention to the fact. We also have the Government, I think it has banned ministers, is it, from appearing on the Today programme because, you know, those questions aren’t any good either? It’s a really worrying trend. As Stella was saying before, you should be feeling uncomfortable, it’s not supposed to be fun for you. It’s actually your job to be scrutinised by the media, and you don’t get to pick and choose which of the media you want to talk to, and you don’t get to play this stupid performative game of antagonising the media for the sake of spectacle and as a way of distracting from your woeful policies. APPLAUSE. Well, I just want to say, thank you, Robert, because you are on this programme, thank you for coming on and taking all the questions taking the odd one for me as well. Do you want to respond to that? I mean, obviously, Rachel has talked about the Today programme, have you appeared on the Today programme? I was last on the Today programme during the election campaign, I did several appearances. But since then? No, I haven’t. Look, I love the Today programme, Radio 4 has been my radio channel of choice for about 30 years. I relish scmtiny, it’s part of my job as a politician, but I do think, you know, with respect, it’s easy to make jibes against a politician whose views you disagree with and suggest that somehow he or she is avoiding the press, when in fact what has happened over the last, you know, few months has been unprecedented scrutiny, and scrutiny that continues in Parliament every week. So the Prime Minister comes and answers questions of MP5 of all different colours, he and his ministers are exposed to scrutiny on the floor of the House where everybody can watch and everybody can... Let him answer, please. Look, the election campaign, I mean, a lot of us, you know, I was in the thick of it in the election campaign, out on the media answering questions, and frankly so was the Prime Minister. He was being interviewed many, many times across the country by national and local and regional media. And he refused to be questioned by Andrew Neil. Oh, well, so what?! So what...?! So what? So what! Look... He ran away from scrutiny. I’m sorry, Ijust think, when you look at the whole picture, the idea that somehow BorisJohnson is someone we don’t know much about and don’t know his views, come on! I mean, he’s probably one of the most scrutinised politicians in modern history. Is there much that we don’t know about BorisJohnson? I don’t think so! And, frankly, you know, my view is that it’s convenient, it’s very convenient, I think, for people who disagree with him to suggest that he is running away. I think the opposite is the case. It’s just... Taking a slightly different tack here, John Humphrys, when he left the Today programme in September, mentioned thatJeremy Corbyn hadn’t been on the Today programme for three years. So I’m wondering, is that a sense of perspective there? Look no, look, I think part of ourjob is to be in that uncomfortable position of being scrutinised, and I don’t think it’s just about your leader, I think it’s about all of us, I think we should try and be part of a healthy vibrant democracy when we have those debates. The challenge here is it’s part of a pattern. Somebody there just shouted about the report into Russia, you know, this is a government that is notjust trying to restrict the press coming into Downing Street, not publishing important reports into intelligence about whether there had been Russian interference in our democracy before an election. When judges challenge them, start to talk about changing the rules of the Supreme Court. A government that then starts floating the idea that we might get rid of the BBC is a national broadcaster. It starts to paint a picture of somebody who actually doesn’t enjoy scrutiny, Robert. You know, if it walks like a duck, talks like a duck, there is a lot of quacking going on here, but not much actual scrutiny of what government is doing. And for us to be able to do ourjob, you know, I can sit in Parliament, I can ask one question, but I am just one MP. We need a healthy, vibrant press, we need an independentjudiciary, because that independence is what keeps us honest and keeps our democracy free and healthy for all of us. And when that gets threatened and slowly the strings get taken away piece by piece, which is what BorisJohnson is doing, all of us will be damaged by it as a result. And yes, I would hold the Labour Party up and say, yes, we have to be part of that process too, we have to be accountable, but I’m not going to give BorisJohnson a free pass when what he’s doing now is not going on mainstream media but has its own Facebook channel where he is pretending to be like Jennifer Aniston, jumping out on people like she’s on Friends! Extraordinary... We are almost out of time. We’ve only got about a minute left. I think now more than ever, politicians need to be held accountable and ask the right questions and give good, solid answers. The time for catchphrases and signposting has been and gone. It has happened, we have left, and so on and so forth. And yes, he does duck interviews, he does get a free pass, and if only being interviewed by the people he likes, what does that say? Anyone can be... Even the nastiest people can be nice to their friends. Ed, we’ve only got about 30 seconds left, I’m afraid. Hugely serious issue. Dominic Cummings, the Prime Minister’s right hand person, called the BBC the mortal enemy of the Conservative Party. We have got to stand up for the BBC if we do nothing else. APPLAUSE. All right. On that note, our hour is up. Thank you very much for all your questions, and I know this issue ofjournalists came up earlier, and a lot of you asked it, so Ijust wanted to get it in quickly at the end, I’m sorry I didn’t have time for many comments from you. But our time is up. Next week we are in Dundee, and a week after that we will be in Weymouth. Call if you would like to be in the audience or go to the Question Time website, and you can follow the instructions there. If you want to carry on this discussion, you can have your say on tonight’s topics, you canjoin Adrian Giles and guests on Question Time Extra Time, that’s on 5 live right now. But itjust remains for me to say thank you very much to the panel, thank you very much to the audience here for coming along and asking so many questions, and thank you to you at home, of course, for watching and for listening. From Harpenden, bye—bye. APPLAUSE.