Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Nicky Morgan, former Education Secretary in David Cameron’s government and Culture Secretary for six months under Borisjohnson, first as an MP and then from the House of Lords as a Conservative peer. Labour’s shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury and MP for ten years and a Labour Party member since the age of 15, Bridget Phillipson. Joining us down the line from New York, world renowned economist, professor, former chief economist of the World Bank and Nobel prizewinner, Joseph Stiglitz, Anne Longfield, children’s Commissioner for England with particular responsibility for vulnerable children and those who are looked after by the state or who are in care and founder of OVO Energy 11 years ago and now the UK’s second largest energy supplier, Good evening. Welcome to my guest here in the studio and to ProfessorJoseph Stiglitz who joins us down the line from New York. Our live audience is with us again via video link, this evening from Sedgefield, which of course is every bit as exciting as New York, very good to have you with us and for all of you watching at home, do join in the conversation. You know how to do it by now, on social media, @bbcquestiontime, it is good to have your company, let us know what you think. Right, let’s take our first question tonight, which is from Steven Way. Thank you, Fiona. Good evening everyone. Why did Rishi Sunak wait so long to come up with today’s new plan when so much of the uk has been struggling for weeks? So, why did you wait so long, Nicky? Well, actually, what has happened, this is the third time in a month that Rishi has responded to the developing situation and that obviously comes on the back of over £200 billion of economic support that the Chancellor and the government have given to businesses, to those who are self—employed and to individuals, in this completely unprecedented year. But why has he waited until now, given the huge row there was over Greater Manchester just on Tuesday? This must have been in the pipeline? Why not announce it then? Well, because I think obviously it takes time to work through the ramifications of the package and don’t forget, of course, the furlough scheme, originally set up in Spring, only expires at the end of this month, so actually it is about looking at what is the situation, what is the support that is needed and listening to what people are saying and, of course, Greater Manchester, as the other areas who have gone into Tier 3 have had that additional support as well. Money that local authorities will also be able to hand out to businesses. I think this has been unprecedented and just look at the impact on our public finances. The right thing to do, but at some point that Bill is obviously going to have to be paid. Bridget. It is incredible that it has taken so long and we, you know, I just do not accept that things have changed so much that it is required, that level of adjustment. They promised us a winter economy plan, not very long ago at all and we are not even into the winter, the situation has not changed so much that he needs to revise that and itjust does not represent a long—term plan for how we get through this. We have seen lots ofjobs lost, while this in action has been there. You know, businesses are going bust, people losing theirjobs, it is a matter of days until what we have got in place expires and all of that worry and anxiety that is being caused, he has had to undo problems of his own making and that is not good enough, when you are dealing with the situation that is unprecedented. But people’s livelihoods are on the line here and, you know, the health response and economic response is going to have to be betterjoined together, because we are in this position, where the test trace and isolate isn’t working as it should, the government spent a considerable amount of money on it, but actually the figure out today show that fewer contacts than ever are being tracked down. People are waiting too long to get test results back and until the government gets a grip on the health crisis, the economyjust will not recover. Stephen, do you think Rishi Sunak has waited too long and do you think what he is offering is enough? So, I can remember starting OVO Energy in 2009 and I remember, in the early days, I knew the names of all my employees, I knew them personally, moving quickly was really easy. We could make decisions, we could react to competitors, we could react to customers really quickly and something I have learned over the last ten years is that the bigger the organisation that you are running, the longer it takes to make change and what we have seen in the last couple of weeks, we have seen a very dynamic landscape, the rate of infection has been unpredictable, it has been rising, in many parts of the country, and I have a lot of sympathy for civil servants and politicians who are having to react in real—time to this and if you think about something as complicated as this employment scheme, and the furlough scheme and everything, I look at this and I say, I have been very impressed at how the machinery of government and I’m notjust saying the government, but the machinery, has been able to move so quickly, because the thing that we really have to avoid is the kind of confusion that has come from badly executed communication or inconsistent policy execution and I think if it takes a little bit longer, of course everyone wants it done yesterday, but if it takes a little bit longer, it takes a little bit longer, and the problem is that we are going to face, they are going to last for years and years and years. So, it feels very urgent at the moment, but getting it right and making sure it is clearly communicated, I think it’s going to be the most important thing in making this successful. Joseph Stiglitz, do you think the UK is getting it right when it comes to how the UK is handling the economy and supporting businesses? Well, first let me say that the delay in the UK has been unconscionable, the deficiencies in the programme were known for a while, the course of the disease is not perfectly predictable, but it was very clear that it was not under control, so there was very clear that there was a need for additional assistance. One does not get it perfect, at any moment of time, so I agree with what has just been said, this is a complicated issue, but the delay causes irreversible damage and enormous anxiety. The one thing I can say about the UK is that it is a model of good behaviour compared to the United States. In what way in particular? If that is the basis of your comparison, you’ve done well. And in what way in particular do you mean? Well, the United States programmes ended inJune, July and the Trump administration has been unable to even come up with an adequate programme, the particular scheme that we had, was not as well—designed as your initial furlough scheme, which was not the optimal design. One of the reasons that unemployment in the United States has skyrocketed, is that we had a deficient scheme in keeping workers affiliated with their firms. Our unemployment insurance scheme was incapable of responding to the millions of people joining the unemployment role and in the United States it is even much more important than in the UK, because most Americans depend on employers for their health insurance and the last thing you want in the middle of a pandemic is to have no health insurance! So, you should appreciate the National Health Service, even if you lose yourjob, you still have the health insurance, in the United States these people losing theirjobs, many of them do not have health insurance. So, it was all the more imperative to keep workers linked with their firms and we failed miserably. I can go into all the reasons why it failed, but it was a badly designed programme, badly administered, having the banks administer a small business programme, you knew, it was predictable what they would do. They gave the money to those that were better connected, which was not the most vulnerable firms or them smallest firms or the firms most in need, they gave it to those who had better connections. So, you know, as you look around the world, I guess I would say the UK has not done as well as countries like New Zealand and many other countries, but, on the other hand, you have done a lot better than the United States. Anne. Well, it does feel very kind of last minute, I think this evening there will be people who will be much more confident about where they stand than yesterday, but that also means that there are people and families especially that had been through an awful lot over recent weeks, not knowing what will come. Everyone who has been on the furlough scheme has known it has come to an end at a certain point and I think that has been a huge stress for people and also a lot of people have gone on to the Universal Credit already, we know 450,000 families have and many also thought that was where they were ending up, too. So, I think, clearly there has been a lot happening at pace, but this is the long term, we need to start now seeing what recovery plan do we need to have in place, how can we support families to make the best decisions for themselves? Obviously, I would say as well, the growing number of children who are being put into poverty, how do we get them out of poverty and make sure no more extra come in? Well, quite a few hands have gone up as we have been talking, Sarah. It really doesn’t help with this sense of the North— south divide and real resentment, I think, in the north, that this has just magically happened in the wake that London has gone into Tier 2. David Owens. I can’t be the only person sitting here wondering where on earth all this money has come from and how inert it is going to be paid back. Yes. Eileen. Compared to Spain, friends of mine in Spain, and their businesses, they have just gone totally bust, very lucrative business, they got 20%, So in comparison, we have done very well. Martin. Yeah, I just wonder if there is a lack of insight in government into actually what is happening. For example, I am a schoolteacher and I am obviously back at school, working full—time, which is where I want to be, but for example, the source of exceptional funding costs for helping schools with Covid ended inJuly at now we have nothing, we have no additionalfunds to pay for cleaning or PPE. Do governments actually have an insight into what is actually happening at a sort of local level? Allen. I think they announced the changes to the system nine days before the furlough system ends and that has caused excess anxiety amongst everyone, really, because no one could plan anything. All money is greatly appreciated, don’t get me wrong, it’s just to actually announce that nine days before the furlough system ends does not give people time to adjust to make changes to their own finances. I mean, what you’re hearing, Eileen makes the point that we are doing better than Spain, for example, and Joseph says we are not as good as some countries, but considerably worse than others, but you have got Sarah talking about the north—south divide and Alan talking about very little time to prepare and it comes back to Stephen’s question, could this not have been done sooner? Well, I go back to the changes and schemes which had been put in place. There was obviously the announcement in September about the winter economy plan, there were announcements inJuly about support forjobs and encouraging employers to keep employees on and getting an extra bonus inJanuary if that is what they have done. As I say, as Stephen said, this is a fast—moving situation and actually it only becomes clear and even then it is not completely clear... What do you say to someone like Sarah who says she finds it interesting that it is happening just as London is about two or London is now in Tier 2 whereas in Sedgefield, for example, they have had restrictions since mid—September! And yet the Chancellor has just spoken about it today. There have been restrictions in Leicester and other places as well and I... Look, I understand, I completely understand the frustrations and to answer the question of the gentleman who said, do ministers and government no, the answer is yes, because all ministers are all pretty much constituency MPs and so they absolutely will be looking at their inboxes, looking at their social media feeds, going to constituencies, hearing what is happening in people’s lives, but government of course has to have a balance between all the different elements of the responses and listening and trying to get that balance right is obviously a huge task and it continues to be so, because the situation continues to develop all of the time and we see, for example, which businesses, obviously have to remain closed and which are able to open gradually and there is even a distinction between hospitality and which can open and which can’t. I just really think that the whole way this looks is one that is last—minute and it makes people feel like they are living in a pinball machine, you know, one week it is this way and one week it is that. I don’t think it is deliberate at all, Ijust think it is that difference between the fast pace of change for people’s lives at the moment and then the machinery of government and the speed it takes or lack of speed it takes to make decisions. I think, really, what people need here is mature, calm discussion, information, ability to be able to plan themselves and also that feeling of trust and what I am hearing here, actually, is whether it is the north—south divide or whether it is looking at reasons for late announcements, there is a need to build that trust and I think that transparency is the way that is going to be achieved. I am going to move onto another question, but before I do, Ijust want to say that we are looking for people to join our virtual audience next week. We are going to be in Lincoln and the week after that we will be in Lewisham, in south—east London, so if you live there or around that area, do get in touch, go to the Question Time website and fill in the form there and we will get in touch with you. We would love to hear from you, the audience is what makes this programme, so do get in touch with us at the Question Time website. Let’s take another question, talking about our audience, from Susan Lowe. Hello. Andy Burnham’s stand in Greater Manchester — is this a master class in how public servants should exercise representative democracy? And what do you think, Susan? Well, I think he was clearly listening to his population in Greater Manchester, which I am not sure is something that I feel the government is doing, because I for one write to my MP on a regular basis and I am constantly told various responses that the government is wanting to put forward. What I don’t get is that human feeling of what the person representing my constituency thinks. And also, when I think that the government is using the whip all the time for votes in Parliament, it is not achieving what we should be achieving, in representing people of this country. Stephen, what did you make of Andy Burnham’s stand in Greater Manchester, standing up for his people or, as others have seen it, dividing the country? So, I think, the situation in Manchester was again changing very quickly and I think Andy Burnham was absolutely right to try to drive for the best possible deal for the people of Manchester, and represent local population. I think that we look at the country the size of the UK, it is made up, it is a very diverse nation and I think there are lots of parts of our society that I feel are not being represented or been listened to and when I think back to the discussion we might have about the presidential debate in the US and we look at politics in the US and look even in the UK and see the Brexit debate that we had and how absolutely tribal it became, it is really clear that we have fallen into a situation where we are simply not good at listening to people that we do not agree with and come from a different tribe and as someone who grew up in Northern Ireland in the 19805 and 19905, I have seen what happens when this really deteriorates to the worst, it brings out the worst in people and I think whether it is a north—south divide or richer versus poorer, we have communities like the arts feeling unrepresented, people who work in hospitality feeling underrepresented and I look at where we have come from, from March, when I remember really feeling a strong sense of national unity and solidarity and that we were all in it together and I look at how far we have come from that in just six months and I think, it is really quite an important moment and I think if we cannot figure out a way to come together, and be more united, then it makes me very nervous for the future of the country. I think, it is not impossible that we start to get some good news and people start to feel more connected, but I think more than anything, we need to see this in our political leadership and when I think about the way in which politics has become so toxic and only looking at the debate yesterday in the Houses of Parliament, if we cannot get some grown—up, collegiate partnership from our political leaders, it is no wonder that the country feels like it is being torn apart. And so I for one would love to see Borisjohnson, Andy Burnham, Nicola Sturgeon, all of them working together in our interests and I say, coming again, I am from Northern Ireland, if Ian Paisley and Martin McGuinness could figure out a way to put their differences aside and work together, then surely our leaders today can. And of course that is what the Prime Minister has wanted Keir Starmer to do repeatedly, is to work with him and work together. And throughout this, we have sought to be constructive, but of course we have to give voice, when we have got real concerns around how the government are handling this and I think Andy Burnham has done an amazing job in standing up for the people he represents and the same is true for local government leaders right across our country. I think the disrespectful, contemptuous way the government has treated, notjust Greater Manchester, but large parts of the north of England, Ifind it worrying and really serious. In the north—east, we have had additional restrictions now for well over a month, even longer in other parts of the North. Hang on, because Labour are calling for a national lockdown, so presumably you’re not objecting to the restrictions, I know you want more funding for those restrictions, but since we are talking about that, how long would you like a national lockdown to go on for? We supported the introduction of local restrictions, but what has not come alongside that is any consistency or clarity around the funding that goes with it, so we have had meetings with ministers, as have council leaders, we cannot get any answers around what we can expect for this formula they apparently used to determine the funding for each area. Just be clear, if you did get the funding required, how long do you think the lockdown should continue? Or how long do you think it should be, because it obviously has not started yet? As we have set out, we think there should be a circuit break to reset where we are, this is the right time to do this, going into half term... For how long? For two to three weeks, so the government have got a chance to sort out test, trace and isolate, it just is not working. We were promised a world heating system and we have got a barely functional system. Until that gets sorted out, we are going to be in a situation where we will face rolling lockdowns in regions right across the country and I know, from many of the people that I speak to in my constituency, workers and businesses alike, they just want to know that there will be an end in sight to all of this. They have made enormous sacrifices to get us to this point, but this sense, I think it is a growing sense of anger and alarm about how the government is handling this and can we ever get to the point where we start to emerge and come out the other side? Louis, you have got your hand up. Yeah. Thank you, Fiona. You talk about a two to three—week circuit breaker, a circuit breaker is just a fancy language for lockdown. We had a three—week circuit breaker in March, we are now seven or eight months into it, so what on earth are we going to achieve in two to three weeks that we haven’t achieved in seven to eight months, there is no guarantee that it will end in two to three weeks, we could be in exactly the same position, just at a later date. We aren’t dealing with the problem, we are just pushing it further and further down the line. Do you want to quickly respond to that? The government has lost control of the virus, we are not in a position... Respond to his question. Never mind about the government. What about the point that Louis made? That is why we are calling for a national circuit breaker, until we get into a position where the government has got control of the virus. He is asking what difference do you think it would make? It would allow the government, it would allow us to dampen down the infection rates, which are rising right across the country, notjust in areas that are subject to local restrictions, it would allow the government to get a grip on test, trace and isolate. In two to three weeks? Do you think they would actually get test, trace and isolate to be world beating in two to three weeks? There are immediate changes that the government could make to get the system working better, to give greater powers to local councils, to run some of that system, who are much better connected to what is going on than the current kind of privatised model that we have got at the moment, that involves giving a very large sums of money to private consultants at a point where actually we could do that much better if that were devolved to local communities. Jack, you have had your hand up for a while, let us hearfrom you. I have, because my husband is volunteering on Test and Trace and I would just like to point out that although I do feel that the government could build a better system to manage that, it will not mitigate for people not picking up the phone and it will not mitigate against people who are unprepared to share details to help trace people. Eileen, you have had your hand up as well. I think that the opposition arejust basically going against the government all the time, regardless of what it is, it doesn’t matter what it was, they will always go the opposite and they have never, ever come up with a solution, a viable solution, to prove anything at all. So, Ijust think Boris has done marvellous myself. And my family... You are cheering up Nicky enormously, Eileen! Nikki is looking veryjolly at that. I love that. I do, I think he has done a marvellousjob, I really do. I despair if Labour were in charge, for all of us, I think. You have got your work cut out there, I think, Bridget, to persuade Eileen. Joseph, I mean the question is about Andy Vernon has Michael —— Burnham standing Greater Manchester, I don’t know how closely you have been following that over in the States, but obviously it is in part about local politicians taking a stand against the national government. Well, I think there is a lot of truth in the circumstances in different locations are markedly different, but there is a need for national leadership and it is clear that in the initial phases of Covid—19, in both the UK and the US, the national leadership was not doing what it should — the idea of herd immunity, which was pushed, was an absurd idea. The good thing is that you have done a lot better than the United States subsequently. Our national leadership still has not come to terms with the problem, but the notion, at the core of the problem, is developing social solidarity, that was what was pointed out before, and when you have leadership that is not developing that kind of trust and social solidarity, you’re going to have a much poorer response to the pandemic and that is why countries where there is a lot of social solidarity, leadership that exhibits that social solidarity, countries like New Zealand and South Korea, have done a lot better. Both in terms of the pandemic and in terms of the economic response, so it seems to me that, as I look across the Atlantic, I see a big failure in the national leadership in the UK and a better national leadership would try to enhance that solidarity and recognise that there is both a need for national leadership, but also for local and regional leadership. Lesley. Hello, Ifeel there is a real disconnect between national leadership and the local leadership and when there is research coming out that says that children in large numbers in the north—east and towns are living in poverty, so 33% in Sedgefield, A1% in Middlesbrough, for instance, you know, we need somebody at local level to take the issue to the leadership and I think after yesterday’s debate, I did not see that leadership at a national level. Does that concern you, Nicky? What, this issue... Not seeing leadership at a national level, hearing whatJoseph was saying. I don’t agree with that and of course we have also heard from Eileen about her enthusiasm for the leadership of Boris, so I think, I am sitting on a House of Lords committee at the moment, called Life Beyond Covid and imagine there is such a thing, we are going to get there eventually and we will get there, we absolutely will, because that is the history of pandemics through the years, but we obviously do not know how and when and actually people’s experiences of this year are very much conditioned or peoples views are very much conditioned by their own experiences and Steve was right to mention, people are now not divided by Brexit, they are divided about their view on lockdown. Some people feel very strongly that another national lockdown is the right thing to do, I totally disagree with that and other people feel it has to be very much regional and to the point that Lesley has just made and I am sure that Anne will have something to say about that, given her role, the great sadness is that we have spent three years talking about Brexit and just at the time that the country was hopefully going to be able to move forward and tackle children’s outcomes, social care, we are now obviously all of us having to deal with this virus, I think there is far more social solidarity than actually people realise. You know, I obviously live in the Midlands and communities are still very much helping each other out. There was a headline today in the Times saying that actually young people are taking the responsibility of social distancing seriously and that it is beginning to bring the numbers down and that is what we are going to see, throughout this period obviously of the virus, and in terms of where we started on this question, which was about regional leadership, for disclosure, lam married to a local authority leader, I am watching him and his colleagues obviously debating with ministers and others about restrictions on what is going to happen and everything else and I think that what is right is that regional local authority leaders and national leadership obviously have to work together. It is very difficult, because national leadership will often be able to see things that pitch up across the country in a way that inevitably regional and local authorityjust cannot and will not and they shouldn’t, because they are there to stand up for a local area, but where we started with the question about Andy Burnham, my worry about the way that he has conducted things is that somehow to say that is right is to say that those people like DanJarvis and Joe Anderson and Steve Rotherham in Merseyside, who have not behaved like that, have not done right by their communities and I don’t think that is right at all. I think everyone has to approach this differently and it is quite right that we are going to see and I think we should see rolling, regional lockdowns if that is what is needed, because it would not be right, the Prime Minister was absolutely right, we have to keep the economy moving, as much as we can, in certain areas of the country, whilst accepting that, sadly, until we are through this, the way we want to live our lives is going to be curtailed. Anne, question — was what Andy Burnham did this week a masterclass in local democracy? So, what I think is happening is that actually local and national leaders, and I am a fan of the new mayors are having to find out a new way to work together that actually can be constructive. It is new, people are not used to it and actually it is working more or less and Andy was absolutely right to represent the real need of those people in Manchester and the like, but clearly it fell into a place where actually all the airways were full of the unpleasant and seemingly unsympathetic way that the talks came to an end, now what I would say about that was actually, the more the airwaves are filled with that, the less time there is to look at the real problems, which I am hearing from the people asking the questions here, which is actually child poverty is rising, especially in the north—east, how actually families are going to find their way forward, what comes next and how can people feel that level of trust in their leaders, both nationally and locally? I think, again, we need to have that real confidence in our leaders, be they nationally or locally, having that grown—up debate. And if it does fall into point—scoring at all, really, and not saying that anyone is at this point, then that is absolutely missing the point. Matthew. I honestlyjust wish that the north—east had someone like Andy Burnham, because we have been facing these similar Tier 2 restrictions for so long now and we have not really had anyone to step up to the plate and fight our corner for us and we have watched many of our local businesses just go unheard, close shop and the announcement today from the Chancellor has just come too late for our region and it is really disappointing, to be honest. Let us take another question from Sarah. Is it now the case that Premiership footballers care more about children going hungry than most MPs? So this, of course, is a reference to Marcus Rashford and his campaign to get free school meals throughout the holidays and Labour have supported the idea throughout the holidays until Easter. I mean, Anne, obviously I am going to come to you first as children’s Commissioner for England. Well, certainly Marcus Rashford, young guy, 22, really talented individual and footballer, has rocketed this issue centre stage. It is something that people have campaigned forfor a long time, but he brings that personal experience and, you know, what he is able to do is say, look, for these kids, life is limited in every way. You know, I cannot forget the first time I went into a secondary school and saw food banks and saw washing machines, actually there to watch the kids clothes. That is the reality for a growing number of children and one which, you know, the accusation last night was that it was a sticking plaster, it may not be the full answer, but actually we need a long—term plan and until we have it, the bottom line surely has to be that children get the help they need to not go hungry. I remain absolutely astonished that we are still having this debate, it is 2020, you know, a wealthy country, it has the air of Dickensian about it and I actually think that people do want to do their best for kids and we have done that, the government has been bold and generous in providing free school meals over recent months and to continue that, while we are in the midst of a crisis and pandemic, to me sounds basic. What do you make of comments, for example, from one Tory MP during the debate, where is the slick PR campaigning encouraging absent parents to take some responsibility for their children? I don’t believe in nationalising children. There is always the debate that if you have children, you should look after them, kind of a bit like pets, but again, I thought we had moved beyond that. Of course families want to look after their kids, of course they want to provide for them, but we know that reality is that kids often do not have food in the cupboards. I had a group of Newsround kids come round to see me, really bright individuals, but they told me they will go home and not know what was in the cupboards and for a lot of us, that is difficult to imagine what that means, but it takes away all your confidence, all your self—belief and all your ability, actually, that the future is going to have any promise for you. Ithink, you know, we are in the middle of the pandemic, still, we are at crisis point, there is a growing number of children who are in poverty, that is not going away, it needs a serious plan, and I want government and I would say this, whatever government was there, actually to see it as their mission that they reduce poverty and food poverty, it is something that governments can do, we had seen pensioner poverty reduced drastically over recent years, but really the focus has to be, because if we are going to level up and if anyone in the north—east, everyone wants the north—east to succeed, but actually people have to be able to know that they are going to be able to be financially viable to do that and kids need to know that they are going to be able to succeed and thrive. Martin, you are a teacher of course, what is your perspective? One of the basic rights of a child, according to the UN, is the right to nutritious food, and I think the comments in Parliament, for example, it is really important to remember that poverty is not a choice, it is not a lifestyle choice, and children have the right to nutritious food and I think, really, the government need to understand that and actually, if they can fund eat out to help out, then surely they can fund something that would prevent children from going hungry. David. Ijust find it hypocritical that they voted against extending the free school meals and yet they voted themselves a £3000 plus pay rise. Well, they didn’t vote for themselves, it is an independent committee, I have got that right, haven’t I, Nicky? That’s right. That does that. But, I hear your point. Stephen. What did you make of the debate and the campaign of Marcus Rashford? First of all, I think Marcus Rashford, what an inspiring young man and I have to say, it is really impressive, we were used to other kinds of headlines about footballers, but to see this young man be such a role model and really inspiring in his courage and bravery to stand up for something he really believes in and I think... Do you think the government was right to oppose the motion? We had a brief discussion, it came up in the previous question, about trust and it was about the social cohesion and trust in the government and we have seen countries around the world that have done well with coronavirus, the Covid—19 response, that have both trusted in the people and have the trust of the people and if you look at Jacinda Ardern’s election win in New Zealand, it has been described as an example of compassionate competence, in different kind of democratic area. I still don’t know whether you think the government should have done this? It is an absolute own goal. So, they should have. Ijust don’t understand how it is, even if they don’t believe the detail of this thing, that they can vote against money for children, and I think one of the things we are seen with Covid—19 is that it is exacerbating and making worse social divides that we already have in this country. We have a huge problem with inequality, OVO Energy, has a foundation, one of our investment themes early years education, and there is such a dramatic problem with the fact that in the 21st century, children that grow up in Britain, their economic success in life is already mostly predictable by the age of five and we just need dramatically more investment in children, in education and free school meals for children on school holidays is just so obviously an opportunity for the government to show some compassion. Bridget. I mean, it is just inexplicable that in the middle of this terrible pandemic, as we come into a really difficult winterfor lots of families, that the government will not support this. I think Marcus Rashford has done an incrediblejob, as someone who himself was once poor and hungry, speaking up for vulnerable children who do not have a voice and to make sure that no child goes hungry this Christmas. We are such a wealthy country with a great opportunity and it is a scar on our country that so many children grow up in poverty, avoidable poverty. The government could step in, notjust in this area, but I think this is one aspect of what we have seen is a growing trend in recent years, where more and more children, including those in families where there is work, are finding that the money just is not there and it does not stretch, and that is putting families in an impossible situation. When I grew up, as someone who spent part of my childhood on free school meals in a single—parent family, I was lucky, lots of the other kids that I grew up with, were not so lucky and were not so fortunate. I thought this country, we could put those days behind us, but we are going backwards and it breaks my heart to see kids in my communityjust going hungry in the midst of this terrible, terrible crisis. Joseph. Well, I find this debate actually amazing. I do find what the government did unconscionable. In New York City, when we close the schools in the lockdown, one thing we kept was the school lunch programmes, people could go to the schools and get the lunches that they would have otherwise gotten. A lot of careful social distancing and all that, but the fact that a child who does not get food can be scarred for life and obviously cannot learn in the way that they should. So, as everyone has been saying, as a basic human right, they are a child, the child is a person, you are talking about the future of the UK and the fact that you’re not in the era of Charles Dickens now, you are in the 21st century, that you would be having this debate about whether children should have adequate nutrition, Ifind that quite unbelievable. I mean Nicky, you supported legislation that will give the poorest children free school meals over the holidays back in 2017, is this a good look for the government? Well, I think the Labour Party might have found it would have got more supporters yesterday if the deputy Labour leader had not called one of the Conservative MPs scum in the course of the debate. I have to say yesterday’s debate... I don’t think anyone is defending that, but that is not exactly the point, is it? The point is, if you want to build a Coalition, we have heard comments saying it is unconscionable that the government did not support this, well, 1. II If the Labour Party had wanted an If the labour Party had wanted an Marcus If the Labour Party had wanted an Marcus Rashford complaint about becoming politicised and if the Labour Party have wanted support labour Party have wanted support they would Labour Party have wanted support they would not have had an opposition debate, they would have been other ways to build a Coalition in Parliament and I should just challenge the fact that as Education Secretary. . . challenge the fact that as Education Secretary... Was it a political reason that the government did not support it or did the government not supported because it did not believe in it? The government has put in money dramatically to expand free school meals anyway. Did they not like the way Labour put the motion like the way labour put the motion or like the way Labour put the motion or because the government does not believe in it on principle? The government has spent over £300 million making sure that school meal vouchers can be redeemed and to vouchers ran be redeemed and to answer vouchers can be redeemed and to answer the point made by vouchers can be redeemed and to answer the point made byJoseph, answer the point made byjoseph, when answer the point made byJoseph, when schools were not open in the spring and summer of this year, that is exactly when the government did put those hundreds of millions of pounds in to make sure that meals were available to those children who would otherwise be on free school meals. I personally think there are other ways, and made a good point about needing an overall strategy but making sure we work with their authorities, for example, the clue is free school meals, we give support to children at school, pre—breakfast support to children at school, pre—brea kfast clubs support to children at school, pre—breakfast clubs and after—school pre-breakfast clubs and after-school dubs pre-breakfast clubs and after-school clubs and pre—breakfast clubs and after—school clubs and everything else, but at other times, when the schools have been open, there are other ways in which to get money and the government is putting money into [oral government is putting money into local authorities and I am sure we [oral authorities and I am sure we could do local authorities and I am sure we could do more to put money via local could do more to put money via [oral authorities could do more to put money via local authorities to support families in need, but yesterday’s handling of need, but yesterdays handling of the need, but yesterday’s handling of the debate, watching that toxic debate in Parliament, watching the debate in Partiament, watching the “Y debate in Partiament, watching the way that it debate in Parliament, watching the way that it was handled, Bridget knows, if you want an issue really tackled, do not put it down as an Opposition Day motion if you want to build a Coalition in Parliament. People are going hungry over Christmas because you do not like the Parliamentary process. If you the Partiamentary process. If you really want to the Parliamentary process. If you really want to get people supporting really want to get peopla supporting this really want to get people supporting this debate, labelling Conservative MPs unconscionable and using unparliamentary language and the way unpartiamentary language and the way it was unparliamentary language and the way it was dealt with, absolutely not. The government is putting their money in and it would be better to work together to make sure that [oral work together to make sure that local authorities and schools are [oral authorities and schools are able to get local authorities and schools are able to get that money and help to support those children who are obviously otherwise not getting the sport at home. Very briefly, what do sport at home. Very brieﬂy, what do you make of sport at home. Very briefly, what do you make of that? I think the whole issue of feeding children which is aptly fundamental has got caught up in the political headlight here. It is something that failed yesterday, I think, because it ended up as a secondary issue here. It is too important for that and I do think peopla have important for that and I do think people have to work together to put peopla have to work together to put this people have to work together to put this aside. There has been a lot put in over recent months which means it is even stranger to not put that extra 40 is even stranger to not put that extra A0 million and over the next extra 40 million and over the next few extra A0 million and over the next few weeks. That is what Wales and Scotland are doing. At the end of the day, all those long—term plans the day, all those long-term plans need to the day, all those long—term plans need to be there and all of the different ways of supporting children is really important, but free school meals, be they in school or not, it gets straight to skills —— Michael Kidd and you know they -- Michael Kidd and you know they have got a mail —— Michael Kidd and you know they have got a mail and that is what kids and parents want. I want to take a quick question from David Owen is what kids and parents want. I want to take a quick question from David Owens now. David. Thank you. Given how long this has going on and there is no clear way out, are we all going to follow the rules? Are you? Well, bearing in mind that certain police officers don’t seem to know the rules, it is very to know the mles, it is very difficult, to know the rules, it is very difficult, because they seem to change every couple of minutes. You ran go into a pub change every couple of minutes. You can go into a pub for a meal, but ran go into a pub for a meal, but you cannot go in can go into a pub for a meal, but you cannot go injust can go into a pub for a meal, but you cannot go in just for a can go into a pub for a meal, but you cannot go injust for a beer! We you cannot go in just for a beer! We need to you cannot go injust for a beer! We need to see the science, we need to see the evidence of all these rules. see the evidence of all these mles. Rita, I see the evidence of all these mles. Rita, Ispoke see the evidence of all these mles. Rita, I spoke to see the evidence of all these rules. Rita, I spoke to you earlier before Rita, I spoke to you eartier before we fame Rita, I spoke to you earlier before we came on the programme and you had something rather interesting to say about following the rules. Yes, I about following the mles. Yes, I was just about following the rules. Yes, I was just saying that people need was just saying that peopla need peopla and was just saying that people need people and my friend went through a terrible experience last year that nobody should ever have to go through, no parent, and she lives alone and although I am not in her bubble, I would alone and although I am not in her bubble, Iwould not alone and although I am not in her bubble, I would not hesitate, alone and although I am not in her bubble, Iwould not hesitate, if alone and although I am not in her bubble, I would not hesitate, if she bubble, Iwould not hesitate, if she needed me, bubble, I would not hesitate, if she needed me, ever, to go and see her, he needed me, ever, to go and see her, be with her, because people need people. A lot of people are not peopla. A lot of peopla are not going to people. A lot of people are not going to stick to the rules, not going to stick to the mles, not just because going to stick to the rules, not just because there are so many people in this position. It’s very situational. I am in lockdown at the moment. I’ve got five days to go before I come out of isolation. I have got family in Scotland under one set of rules, Scotland under one set of mles, family in Scotland under one set of rules, family in West Yorkshire, in Sedgefield and Durham it’s a different rule, and I’ve got a different mle, and I’ve got a daughter in different rule, and I’ve got a daughter in Wales and we are all daughter in Walas and we are all living in daughter in Wales and we are all living in different variations and going into different types of lockdown, and it’s hard to keep to the mles. lockdown, and it’s hard to keep to the rules. Personally, I do keep to the mles. Personally, I do keep to the mles the rules. Personally, I do keep to the rules because of my background the mles because of my background working in the the rules because of my background working in the NHS and social responsibility, but I can also self—isolated. I’m in that lucky self-isolated. I’m in that lucky position. I’m interested, considering we are in a national lockdown, but it eased off over the summer and we are now heading back into who knows how long of restrictions, whether attitudes have changed. Eileen. I am 7A and have changed. Eilaen. I am 74 and live have changed. Eileen. I am 74 and live alone have changed. Eileen. I am 7A and live alone and I need family, I need people for mental health reasons, really, so people for mental health reasons, really, sol people for mental health reasons, really, so I don’t think I will be totally sticking to it, whereas I am very careful, and they are very careful with me, but what choices do I have? Did you stick to it religiously the first time, back in March? March? Yes. First time round, but it was very difficult, very difficult. Now my grandson comes and does the garden. I have a big garden and he comes and does it for me, and I have a couple of friends who have come round, and obviously my daughters and sons. I couldn’t live here on my own. I need help with a big house. Louis. I think we’ve seen a couple of recent examples in the country first up we had a funeral where a son was prevented from comforting his grieving mother because it went against the rules, and I saw an against the mles, and I saw an interview against the rules, and I saw an interview on the BBC yesterday when 84-year-old interview on the BBC yesterday when 84—year—old said she had very few 84-year-old said she had very few years left and 84—year—old said she had very few years left and she wasn’t going to spend them confide in a house. I have an 83 rod grandmother who lives alone, a widow. If I didn’t go and see her, I think the effect on her mental health would probably equal the threat that Covid would eventually equate to, so at what point to the restrictions get in the “Y point to the restrictions get in the way of being a basic, decent human being? I way of being a basic, decent human being? lam way of being a basic, decent human being? I am a teacher at Sedgefield community college and, over the past couple of weeks, we have been told we need to reduce our social contact, but I feel as a teacher, and also other contact, but I feel as a teacher, and also otherjobs, it’s very and also other jobs, it’s very difficult and also otherjobs, it’s very difficult to reduce our social contact, when we come into contact with hundreds of students every single day. And Sarah, one point singla day. And Sarah, one point from you. My single day. And Sarah, one point from you. My son is one of his students and is currently isolating at home. I am a students and is currently isolating at home. I am areal students and is currently isolating at home. I am a real stickler students and is currently isolating at home. I am a real sticklerfor at home. I am a real sticklar for the mles at home. I am a real sticklerfor the rules but I totally understand the mles but I totally understand the the rules but I totally understand the compassionate need to see people, I totally support that, but peopla, I totally support that, but it’s incredibly people, I totally support that, but it’s incredibly hard as a parent to be encouraging your children to follow the rules when they see follow the mles when they see peopla follow the rules when they see people breaking them left, right and centre. I don’t want to spend too long on this, but Bridget or Nicky, brieﬂy, how long on this, but Bridget or Nicky, briefly, how much a concern is this? brieﬂy, how much a concern is this? I suspect our briefly, how much a concern is this? I suspect our audience are not alone, they are not naturally rule alone, they are not naturally mle breakers, alone, they are not naturally rule breakers, and I’m making an assumption about ones we have heard from, but they are acting differently this time round, especially with Labour, who was a especially with labour, who was a national especially with Labour, who was a national lockdown to stop if people national lockdown to stop if peopla are not going national lockdown to stop if people are not going to obey the rules, are not going to obey the mles, what’s are not going to obey the rules, what’s the point? We are not arguing for a national lockdown. Cue you want a circuit breaker. We are not calling for an ongoing national lockdown. However calling for an ongoing national lockdown. Howeveryou calling for an ongoing national lockdown. However you want to define it, how concerned are you that peopla will it, how concerned are you that people will not obey the rules out peopla will not obey the mles out of sheer people will not obey the rules out of sheer fatigue? people will not obey the rules out of sheerfatigue? It’s people will not obey the rules out of sheer fatigue? It’s tough, and people will not obey the rules out of sheerfatigue? It’s tough, and I of sheer fatigue? It’s tough, and I hear that. of sheerfatigue? It’s tough, and I hearthat. In of sheerfatigue? It’s tough, and I hear that. In large part of the north—east we have had restrictions north-east we have had restrictions in place for north—east we have had restrictions in place for some time and I know that peopla are in place for some time and I know that people are fatigued by it and that peopla are fatigued by it and want to that people are fatigued by it and want to see a way through the top of course we have to follow the rules. course we have to follow the mles. What it course we have to follow the rules. What it tells me is what we are what it tells me is what we are embarking or What it tells me is what we are embarking or is something that is much psychological as anything else, and that means that rules have to be and that means that mles have to be designed and that means that rules have to be designed understanding how tough they are going to be for people, and they are going to be for peopla, and understanding they are going to be for people, and understanding what we are asking of them. Obviously, I understanding what we are asking of them. Obviously, Iwould understanding what we are asking of them. Obviously, I would encourage them. Obviously, Iwould encourage people to stick them. Obviously, I would encourage people to stick to the rules, but peopla to stick to the mles, but peopla have people to stick to the rules, but people have talked about the mental health burden, and that is obviously massive, but I think, in the grand scheme of things, there will be a “Y scheme of things, there will be a way out, we will get through, history tells us that, but unfortunately it’s going to be a very difficult few months. And a final question which, when I started on Question Time, dominated everything for months on end and I thought we would never talk about anything else! Let’s bring it back with Carol. With global economies being decimated by the COVID 19 pandemic, is now really the best time to be walking into a no deal situation with the EU, regardless of dressing it up as a meaningless "Australia deal"? Joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel prize-winning Joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel prize—winning economist. —— Joe said, let’s hear your as a Nobel prize—winning economist. ——Joseph. prize-winning economist. -- joseph. I think it prize—winning economist. ——Joseph. I think it was a bad thing to look into, a no—deal Brexit, any time, into, a no-deal Brexit, any time, but this is into, a no—deal Brexit, any time, but this is an especially bad time. The global economy is going to be weak. The global economy is going to be week. There is a slowdown everywhere, but in Europe, and that will of itself impose constraints on trade. And then there is a slowdown in the UK, and on top of all that, to put new trade barriers seems particularty to put new trade barriers seems particularly foolish. On top of particularty foolish. On top of that, to do particularly foolish. On top of that, to do it in a context where there is no deal, where there is uncertainty about the political, how is the Ireland issue going to be dealt with? Where are the boundaries? What would be the consequences? Enormous amount of uncertainty, and what we have heard in the discussion in the last hour is how the pandemic has brought uncertainty, how the government’s failure to uncertainty, how the government’s hhmhyn uncertainty, how the government’s failure to give the kinds of assistance at the right time, in a timely way has enhanced the uncertainty that individuals face, so we have the pandemic, we have the inadequate economic response to the pandemic, and now we have the uncertainty of a no—deal Brexit. It uncertainty of a no-deal Brexit. It seems to me, uncertainty of a no—deal Brexit. It seems to me, if you were going to maximise uncertainty, you couldn’t have done a better maximise uncertainty, you couldn’t have done a betterjob. I run a have done a better job. I nm a business have done a betterjob. I run a business with about 7500, 8000 employees in the UK, and we also operate in France and Spain. I run operate in France and Spain. I mn an aircraft operate in France and Spain. I run an aircraft business, building electric flying taxes, with a big electric ﬂying taxes, with a big European electric flying taxes, with a big European supply chain, and Brexit is not in the top ten list of things that I spent my time thinking about or worrying about. Is that because you wouldn’t be particularly affected? There are much bigger issues. I have to say, I think, affected? There are much bigger issues. I have to say, Ithink, if you look at where we are right now in the negotiations, we have a couple of months left to go, I think it’s absolutely right that the government is saying, we need to have a strong full back position. As somebody who has been a lot of negotiation, in a negotiation you have to say, we are going to shake hands and walk away if we don’t get an agreement. You have to be in a position where people are ready for position where peopla are ready for that, and I position where people are ready for that, and I am optimistic, and I that, and lam optimistic, and I hope we will that, and I am optimistic, and I hope we will find the right agreement but, if you look at the history of EU trade negotiations, it’s very difficult. Can a debt it’s very difficult. (“an a debt negotiator it’s very difficult. Can a debt negotiator for seven years to get their free trade agreement and it was held up by one state in Belgium for a year. So God help us, is that what you are saying? We have to have a robust negotiating position but we also have to think about what kind of economy we are going to build, what does independence from the you you must freedom to do, more renewable energy, carbon price and taxation, we will have COP26 in the taxation, we will have (20st in the UK, and we taxation, we will have COP26 in the UK, and we have an opportunity to [ad the UK, and we have an opportunity to lead the world in the next zero transition. That is the opportunity we should be talking about. I think it’s hard to believe that this is almost a PS question whereas, at one point, it dominated completely. Tell point, it dominated complately. Tell me about point, it dominated completely. Tell me about it! What it did do was it me about it! what it did do was it drove out any me about it! What it did do was it drove out any discussion about domestic issues for that time, so that was my real worry, it wiped that off the agenda. Clearly it adds that off the agenda. Cleariy it adds to that off the agenda. Clearly it adds to uncertainty. It wouldn’t be ideal. But, you know, like it or not, it is going to happen, and now I think peopla not, it is going to happen, and now I think people need to see what this I think peopla need to see what this does I think people need to see what this does mean for the future, in terms of does mean for the future, in terms ofjobs, in terms of progress, and how this will help our area actually not only get back on their feet but get ahead. There is a lot at stake, obviously. This absolutely has to work for the kind of questions we have seen this evening. I sincerely hope that we get a deal for the businesses in the north—east are businesses in the north-east are facing a tough businesses in the north—east are facing a tough enough time without this added uncertainty for the great manufacturing export businesses that depend on that trade. I sincerely hope the government do absolutely everything to get the deal, stop the posturing, stop messing about and get it done. Dropped the posturing, Nicky. The news today is the fact that discussions are continuing, and I think they will and I am hopeful there will be a deal, so I think they will and I am hopeful there will be a deal, sol I think they will and I am hopeful there will be a deal, so I don’t think we are heading to the outlined by our question of the top what we can’t do is tarry by our question of the top what we can’t do is carry on extending the transition period, getting businesses to prepare and do not prepare, and Stephen said that of the top ten things to worry about this is not on it, I don’t know if it was, but it’s not now. Hindsight is a marvellous thing but, if you had been able to look into a crystal ball and no that we were going to be leaving the EU in the middle of a pandemic, with a recession forecast the likes of which we have never seen, or not for hundreds of years, would you really want seen, or not for hundreds of years, would you really wa nt to seen, or not for hundreds of years, would you really want to be doing it now? As you say, who knows? We don’t know what’s going to happen for the what you would try to have done would be to have left completely in the Slst of January this year, so the 31st of january this year, so that the 31st of January this year, so that were clear by the time the government had to be dealing with the pandemic, and the lesson we learnt from the three years before that is you keep kicking the can that is you keep kicking the ran down that is you keep kicking the can down the road it doesn’t get easier. People voted the way they did in 2016, including many people in the 2016, including many peopla in the parts of the 2016, including many people in the parts of the country where we have audience on tonight. They waited a long time in order audience on tonight. They waited a long time in orderfor this to long time in order for this to happen. I long time in orderfor this to happen. I think it’s right that we get on with it. It is possible. We have ministers engaged in that, civil servants engaged in that, and other parts of government focused on the vims. other parts of government focused on the virus. It is possible to do both the vims. It is possibla to do both at the the virus. It is possible to do both at the same time. How confident are you will get a deal? I think both sides want deal, and I think right across Europe they realise that having a deal would make everybody’s having a deal would make everybodrs life much, having a deal would make everybody’s life much, much easier. I guess you ran never say, life much, much easier. I guess you can never say, because the other ran never say, because the other thing I learnt can never say, because the other thing I learnt about Boris can never say, because the other thing I learnt about BorisJohnson thing I learnt about Boris johnson it is thing I learnt about BorisJohnson it is absolute prepared to walk away in a way which our previous Prime Minister was not, but I think we all know that, of course, life would be easier on the 1st of know that, of course, life would be easier on the 1st ofJanuary know that, of course, life would be easier on the 1st of January with a easier on the 1st of january with a deal in place. easier on the 1st of January with a deal in place. Discussions started again today and we will see where they end up. Our time is up. Tonight, our questioners came from Sedgefield. Thank you for Tonight, our questioners came from Sedgefield. Thank you forjoining Sedgefield. Thank you for joining us. You Sedgefield. Thank you forjoining us. You were tremendous. Next week, we are joined by us. You were tremendous. Next week, we arejoined by an us. You were tremendous. Next week, we are joined by an audience in Lincoln and by Rupert Soames, the boss of Serco, one of the companies involved in Test and Trace. We will also be joined involved in Test and Trace. We will also bejoined by the involved in Test and Trace. We will also be joined by the former, however briefly, director of communications for Donald Trump, communications for Donald Tmmp, Anthony communications for Donald Trump, Anthony Scaramucci Philip why would Anthony Saramucci Philip why would you want to Anthony Scaramucci Philip why would you want to miss that? After Anthony Scaramucci Philip why would you want to miss that? After that, the audience comes from Lewisham, south—east London. Get in touch and south-east London. Get in touch and take the south—east London. Get in touch and take the opportunity to put your questions. We would love to hear from you for Question Time is what it is because of the audience. You ran apply by it is because of the audience. You can apply by going to the website. ran apply by going to the website. You ran can apply by going to the website. You can fill in the form and we will You ran fill in the form and we will hear what You can fill in the form and we will hear what you’ve got to safe and hopefully you will be part of our virtual audience next week. For now, Adrian Chiles and guests are on Question Time Extra Time, your chance to put your points to that on Radio 5 Live. You can see how to get Radio 5 Live. You ran see how to get in touch on Radio 5 Live. You can see how to get in touch on the screen. For now, thank you very much to my panel for coming here this evening, socially distance, as we always are now offered up to our audience, thank you to you, and to Professor offered up to our audience, thank you to you, and to ProfessorJoseph you to you, and to Professorjoseph Stiglitz from you to you, and to ProfessorJoseph Stiglitz from New York, and to you at home for watching. From Question Time, goodbye.