Tonight, we are in Buxton. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight plasma panel, jame to Question Time. On tonight plasma panel, Jame Cleverly, former Brexit panel, jame Cleverty, former Brexit minister panel, Jame Cleverly, former Brexit minister under Theresa May and Leave campaigner in the EU referendum, now chairman of campaigner in the EU referendum, new chairman of the Conservative Party. A member of the Labour Party since A member of the labour Party since the age of 19, A member of the Labour Party since the age of 19, worked for the housing charity shelter and the NHS before being elected an MP in 2017, Sarah jones. before being elected an MP in 2017, Sarahjones. Minette Batters, the Sarah jones. Minette Batters, the first Sarahjones. Minette Batters, the first female president the National Farmers’ Union, runs her own family farming Wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs farming wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs the farming Wiltshire. Sacha Lord, runs the Warehouse Project. Manchester’s first night tsar. Comedian and guest on shows like Mock the Week, Geoff Norcott. APPLAUSE Welcome to our panel, to the audience and to you at home. Don’t forget, you ran audience and to you at home. Don’t forget, you canjoin in the conversation on social media. Right, let’s get started with our first question from Jack Hadfield. Thank question from jack Hadfield. Thank you. Should question from Jack Hadfield. Thank you. Should the Department for Transport and the Treasury shoulder the majority of the blame for failures of Northern Rail? Northern Rail, which I imagine quite a lot of you use here in the audience, since it is the only line I think you can it is the only line I think you ran use from it is the only line I think you can use from Buxton. Sarah, do you want to kick as off? Just been taken back to kick as off? just been taken back into to kick as off? Just been taken back into government control? It has, renationalising it. Good to see they are following our lead. The government has no real strategy. Chris Grayling, we remember, famously said I am not in charge of the trains. Most of you will have suffered under Northern Rail and most of us have suffered under the rail network as we find it now. This is the second line now that the government have decided to renationalise, only on a temporary way. The question is why did it take so long? We knew it was rubbish for so long before they acted. Why so long before they acted. why didn’t they so long before they acted. Why didn’t they act faster? And what reassurances have they put in place? None yet, that was say actually we will stop the delays, reinvest in the infrastructure and we will make the infrastmclure and we will make sure we get a the infrastructure and we will make sure we get a better deal for customers. For me, rail nationalisation make sense partly because it’s actually quite simple. There are no assets you have to buy back when the franchises come up, you ran take back when the franchises come up, you can take them into public you ran take them into public control you can take them into public control and say let’s put customers first, service first, security first and let’s make sure we run the rail and let’s make sure we nm the rail companies in the and let’s make sure we run the rail companies in the way that works for us and not just companies in the way that works for us and notjust for those privatised us and not just for those privatised companies. I us and notjust for those privatised companies. I think, us and notjust for those privatised companies. Ithink, why us and notjust for those privatised companies. I think, why didn’t they do it before, why has it taken so long, why don’t we go further? Sacha, as Manchester’s nightlife guru... Sacha, as Manchester’s nightlife gum... Am I Sacha, as Manchester’s nightlife guru... Am I the only northerner on gum... Am I the only northerner on the panel? We guru... Am I the only northerner on the panel? We have an audience full of them! Obviously. For me, D D franchising is absolutely welcomed. It is long, long overdue. I think the difference between London transport and the transport in the North is an absolute disgrace. It’s like comparing the premiership in London to Vauxhall conference league. The mayors in the North, Steve Rotherham and Andy Burnham, on a daily basis have been complaining to the government. I know people who have lost their jobs to the government. I know people who have lost theirjobs because they have been waiting for these old trains to turn up, they’re cancelled, they turn up late, they are consistently late for work and when they do get on them, they are overcrowded. It is not right. Why overcrowded. It is not right. why does a overcrowded. It is not right. Why does a bus in London cost £1, a bus in Manchester costs £A? There is a in Manchester costs £4? There is a great in Manchester costs £A? There is a great integrated in Manchester costs fir? There is a great integrated transport system in London that is capped at £10. In London that is rapped at £10. In Greater London that is capped at £10. In Greater Manchester, you can spend Greater Manchester, you ran spend 20- BO Greater Manchester, you can spend 20- £30 in Greater Manchester, you can spend 20— £30 in a day. I think it’s not 20- £30 in a day. I think it’s not fair and it’s great 20— £30 in a day. I think it’s not fair and it’s great we have seen a slight sign the government are listening to what we in Greater Manchester and Buxton have been asking for. It’s about time, it’s long, long overdue. APPLAUSE So the question, James, is how much So the question, james, is how much should the So the question, James, is how much should the Department for Transport and the Treasury, the government, shoulder the blame for the failures of Northern Rail. There are those who argue that the timetable was set for Northern Rail by the government and was undeliverable and the infrastructure was not there. The infrastmclure was not there. The new railway infrastructure was not there. The new railway lines were not there, the updates Manchester Piccadilly just went there in order for Northern Rail... I’m not saying they have done everything right but the Northern Rail to deliver the timetable in 2018, when hundreds of timetabla in 2018, when hundreds of trains timetable in 2018, when hundreds of trains were cancelled in a day? trains were ancellad in a day? Well, it’s trains were cancelled in a day? Well, it’s absolutely right that the government has taken Northern Rail or is in the process of taking Northern Rail back into public ownership, public management. How much do you take the blame for what has happened at Northern Rail? I think we should remind ourselves that the franchising of our rail network has seen record levels of investment, record increases in passenger numbers. The government is now committed to extending the rail network so it reaches more parts of the country forced at Northern Rail has not worked and that is why Northern Rail has been brought back into public ownership. Do you think the government has any role in Northern Rail not working? The government always has a role to play government always has a rola to play in a public government always has a role to play in a public transport network but the vast majority of the rail network in the country, we have seen increased passenger numbers, increased investment, new rolling stock. That has not happened in Northern Rail. The pace of trains are long, long past their sell by date. The Prime Minister made it clear when he was campaigning that that would be resolved. I’m very pleased to see he is once again delivering on the promises he made in his leadership campaign. The promises we made in the general election campaign and we are getting elaction campaign and we are getting a grip on what election campaign and we are getting a grip on what has been a failing service. Right, quite a few hands up. You, sir? I’ve been a Northern Rail customer for the last three to four years. What would you call it? four years. what would you all it? A disgrace is four years. What would you call it? A disgrace is probably the polite term. The first thing I do in the morning when my alarm goes off is which train is cancelled and if I which train is ancellad and if I will get to which train is cancelled and if I will get to work on time. I agree, if there is the south of the border it would have been fixed yesterday. As commuters, we welcome it but what will happen in the next two or three years? will we will happen in the next two or three years? Will we see an immediate years? will we see an immediate change or will years? Will we see an immediate change or will we have to wait even longer for that? change or will we have to wait even longerforthat? 0K. change or will we have to wait even longerforthat? OK. I change or will we have to wait even longerforthat? 0K. Iwould change or will we have to wait even longerfor that? OK. I would like to longer for that? OK. I would like to take you to longerfor that? OK. I would like to take you to task when you say there is more investment in the railways. MY is more investment in the railways. My sons work in London. They go to some pancreas on a Friday night, the last ticket he bought was £160 and he didn’t get a seat. Now, it’s almost impacting on family and now, that families cannot go around the that families rannot go around the country and that families cannot go around the country and be transported on your railway network because of the overcrowding, the expense, the delays, the cancellations. It’s an absolute joke. delays, the cancellations. It’s an absolutejoke. The railway network absolute joke. The railway network is a joke. absolutejoke. The railway network is a joke. APPLAUSE And you? Spent per capita in the And you? Spent per rapita in the north of And you? Spent per capita in the north of England on public transport is two and a half times less than is two and a half times lass than that in is two and a half times less than that in London. How can that be that in London. How ran that be justified? The that in London. How can that be justified? The lady in the yellow scarf? I would like to ask justified? The lady in the yellow scarf? I would like to askJame scarf? I would like to ask jame Cleverty, scarf? I would like to askJame Cleverly, what specifically we are Cleverty, what specifically we are going to see Cleverly, what specifically we are going to see by way of changes and when? What will be different and when? what will be different and when when? What will be different and when will we see it? I will come to the rest of the panel but you can the rest of the panel but you ran come in on the rest of the panel but you can come in on this. Ten years more or lass of come in on this. Ten years more or less of Conservative government. Person calling the railway disgrace and some other saying when will it be different and what he and some other saying when will it be different and what be different? The announcement has only be different and what be different? The announcement has onlyjust come The announcement has only just come out. I The announcement has only just come out. Iran’t The announcement has onlyjust come out. I can’t and I am not in a position to give you the kind of detail that you are asking for at the moment. The reason the government has taken it in houses because we have listened to the anger and the complaints from people anger and the complaints from peopla that anger and the complaints from people that use a service and we are responding to that. The Prime Minister has said is enough is enough, you have had enough second chances, no more excuses, we are taking this off you, we’re going to make improvements, going to make sure there is more rolling stock and that it services the people that rely on for work and to get... To see family or whatever reason you might use the train service. The gentleman who said the differential between transport investment in the south of the country in the north of the country is completely out of kilter is absolutely right. This is one of the big lessons that I think one of the big lassons that I think politicians one of the big lessons that I think politicians should have learned a number of years ago... In the last ten years? when number of years ago... In the last ten years? When millions of people ten years? when millions of peopla in the country ten years? When millions of people in the country said we are not happy with the status quo. The Conservative Party took that lesson Conservative Party took that lasson on Conservative Party took that lesson on board which is why we are taking a very different approach to regional policy and making sure we increase the investment in the North of England. Will you level up? Absolutely, the Prime Minister made that commitment and this is the first of a number of delivery on the promises that we made. For me, we are talking about trains, it’s not just poor trains in the north but poor transport in general. We have sat here in poor transport in general. We have set here in Buxton. Buxton is an sat here in Buxton. Buxton is an absolute set here in Buxton. Buxton is an absolute bottleneck for traffic, it’s an absolute nightmare. I’m sure you are aware of that. I was amazed today that I had two major cities, Manchester and Sheffield, had the poorest connection between the two cities in the whole of Europe. They are major cities. It needs looking at and quickly. I think we need to be giving more powers to people be giving more powers to peopla locally. The be giving more powers to people locally. The people in Westminster locally. The peopla in Westminster don’t locally. The people in Westminster don’t know what’s best for people in Greater Manchester. We need more powers in Greater Manchester. 50, powers in Greater Manchester. So, for example, powers in Greater Manchester. 50, for example, the mayor of Greater Manchester, Liverpool... They need the powers, they know what is right to the buses and trains. We need to have more power devolved up here. Minutes? Behalf of the members I represent, 10,000 farmers across represent, 47,000 farmers across England and represent, 10,000 farmers across England and Wales, 3 lot of them are England and Walas, a lot of them are living in very England and Wales, 3 lot of them are living in very rural communities, living in very mral communities, pub“: living in very rural communities, public transport absolutely vital for them and I would very much agree with what Sacha says in the gentleman in the blue at the back. I think this has been London centric. We have had a two tier public transport system and it is failing and it is failing very many parts of the country that need it most. 50 we the country that need it most. So we have to the country that need it most. 50 we have to prioritise the investment. I think it is great that it is being brought back in—house but we cannot brought back in-house but we cannot tarry on brought back in-house but we cannot carry on with brought back in—house but we cannot carry on with this two tier system and I think there a lot of the problems with bricks and anything problams with bricks and anything else, problems with bricks and anything else, everyone thinks everything is driven by Londoners in London it is out of touch with the rural parts of out of touch with the mral parts of the country, out of touch with the rural parts of the country, particularly in Buxton, the country, particularty in Buxton, a very mral part the country, particularly in Buxton, a very rural part of the country. a very mral part of the country. People feel a very rural part of the country. People feel let down and disadvantaged. Geoff Norcott? It’s interesting, this far right Boris johnson interesting, this far right Boris Johnson government and one of the johnson government and one of the first act is Johnson government and one of the first act is to nationalise a rail provider. In fairness, first act is to nationalise a rail provider. Infairness, I’m have provider. In fairness, I’m have given a lot provider. Infairness, I’m have given a lot stick to provider. Infairness, I’m have given a lot stick toJeremy Corbyn given a lot stick to jeremy Corbyn over the given a lot stick to Jeremy Corbyn over the years and this is one argument that won the argument. I’m a little uncomfortable about governments getting too involved a new hope is temporary. But I Sacha brought up, the ridiculous thing in this country is the North to South links are the ones away looked at that if you want to go side to side, there is some sort of weird prejudice against that. You might as well just get a prejudice against that. You might as welljust get a new prejudice against that. You might as well just get a new all. prejudice against that. You might as welljust get a new all. Everyone well just get a new all. Everyone nodding their welljust get a new all. Everyone nodding their heads in the audience. What’s the prejudice against side to what’s the prejudice against side to side quest What’s the prejudice against side to side quest about services connecting Manchester and Sheffield, the trans—Pennine express, Brilliant trans-Pennine express, Brilliant staff in a trans—Pennine express, Brilliant staff in a heroic commitment to the Buffy in a single carriage train but Buffy in a singla carriage train but we talk Buffy in a single carriage train but we talk about connecting the north with London, how about connecting the north with the North? Yeah, right. APPLAUSE Lets pick up on that point. Let’s follow on from what you are saying, Geoff. julie follow on from what you are saying, Geoff. Julie Ollernshaw? Is HS2 the Geoff. julie Ollernshaw? Is HSZ the best way to Geoff. Julie Ollernshaw? Is HS2 the best way to spark infrastructure revolution? So, there has been a bit of a meeting today with Boris Johnson, meeting today with Boris johnson, with meeting today with Boris Johnson, with the Transport Secretary Grant Sharps with the Transport Secretary Grant Shapps and Sergei Javid. with the Transport Secretary Grant Shapps and Sergeijavid. Were with the Transport Secretary Grant Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you Shapps and Sergei javid. Were you there, Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you there, James? No, I Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you there, James? No, Iwas Shapps and Sergei Javid. Were you there, James? No, I was on my way there, james? No, I was on my way here on a there, James? No, I was on my way here on a Pacer train. When we were here on a Pacer train. when we were on our way here, here on a Pacer train. When we were on our way here, the train was cancelled. Couldn’t get on the first train because it was overcrowded, I feel your pain. The review is looking at the whole situation around HSZ, the cost and the sequencing and that kind of stuff. Is anyone dissenting in the cabinet? The Cabinet the way cabinets work and the Premier because making this clear, is we come to a collective clear, is we come to a collactive decision in clear, is we come to a collective decision in private and then once we have come to a collective decision, have come to a collactive decision, that is the have come to a collective decision, that is the decision of the whole cabinet, the whole government. That will be quite a novelty, we haven’t seen that in quite a will be quite a novelty, we haven’t seen that in quite along will be quite a novelty, we haven’t seen that in quite a long time! Things are changing under the new Prime Minister and changing for the better. You are in favour? I think it’s absolutely key and as Geoff was saying, I it’s absolutely key and as Geoff was saying, Ithink it’s absolutely key and as Geoff was saying, I think there is unanimity on the panel here, that’s big parts of the country, particularly in the of the country, particularty in the North of of the country, particularly in the North of England, have not been as well serviced by public transport and other things as they should be. And making sure that that is addressed is absolutely a priority. HSZ is addressed is absolutely a priority. HS2 is one of the options, obviously HSZ is one of the options, obviously there are HS2 is one of the options, obviously there are concerns about some of the cost projections about that and that will need to be looked at. But the broader point I want to make is the government is absolutely committed to making sure that the whole of the to making sure that the whola of the country in to making sure that the whole of the country in every community across the country, is properly connected the country, is property connected and ran the country, is properly connected and can feel the benefit of the and ran feel the benefit of the growth in and can feel the benefit of the growth in the UK economy? Julie, growth in the UK economy? julie, what is your growth in the UK economy? Julie, what is your view? ﬂ I think we are better to be able to cross the country by Northern Rail rather than HS2 cross the country by Northern Rail rather than H52 and the amount of money and, by the time it gets to the north, whether it will be obsolete. The man at the front. I obsolate. The man at the front. I think obsolete. The man at the front. I think there is a brilliant missed opportunity to connect Derby with Buxton, and therefore Nottingham and Derby with Manchester, by reopening a line which is 12 miles long and a line which is 12 mils long and probably a line which is 12 miles long and probably wouldn’t cost as much as HSZ, probably wouldn’t cost as much as H52, and that is a whole, you know, you could get a connection from Lincoln to Nottingham, and that would connect the east with the law. HSZ, is it the best to infrastructure revolution? I think infrastmclure revolution? I think we probably infrastructure revolution? I think we probably wouldn’t start from this point, but the issue with HS2 is point, but the issue with HSZ is it’s been point, but the issue with HS2 is it’s been going round for ten years, we’ve spent about 9 billion, a huge amount of money, and 2000 people are amount of money, and 2000 peopla are working on it. amount of money, and 2000 people are working on it. Seven billion already spent. Work is under way, we are not starting from scratch, so I think we have to go for it. This country is really bad at finishing large infrastructure projects, so we have infrastmclure projects, so we have to do this, infrastructure projects, so we have to do this, but not at the expense of everything else, and we had an announcement two years ago from the government that they were going to reopen all of the tracks that had been closed by the preaching review, so 5000 miles worth of tracks that so 5000 milas worth of tracks that we so 5000 miles worth of tracks that we were we were promised it was a 500 million funding to help restore some of the railway lines. They have promised £500 million, and I am told that will get you between 25 and 50 miles worth of track, so the tracks milas worth of track, so the tracks that miles worth of track, so the tracks that were closed in this area, are they going to be reopened or not? Are we going to be looking at some of those replacements? There is also a big review going on at the moment the Department for Transport about whether or not we have a whole new system of the rail network, but it’s taking a very long time to stop they are doing it piecemeal. You go into the Department for Transport and one person deals with that franchise, one person deals with that one, and none of them ever talk to each other, none of them can do anything other, none of them ran do anything for I did a project other, none of them can do anything for I did a project once on ticketing, and trying to get a ticket that gets you to one place to another as cheap as possible, and it’s virtually impossible. Yes, we need to do HSZ, we need to do far more in terms of infrastructure development, because we are running development, because we are mnning on development, because we are running on Victorian lines at the moment, and we need to expect more. Our country, our transport system is a bit of an embarrassment, compared to other European countries, so we really need to step up and invest. who in really need to step up and invest. Who in the audience supports the who in the audience supports the building of Who in the audience supports the building of HS2? Yes, sir. Absolutely, we need to start increasing the connectivity to the north, but the question which was asked earlier, which hasn’t been asked eartier, which hasn’t been answered, asked earlier, which hasn’t been answered, is the cost to the individual user. It’s a huge disincentive to use the railways, when it costs £250 for an open return from Macclesfield to London, return from Macdasfield to London, a return from Macclesfield to London, a scandalous amount of money for the lady said eartier, a scandalous amount of money for the lady said earlier, you may or may lady said eartier, you may or may not get seat for lady said earlier, you may or may not get seat for that price. Sacha Lord. (“are not get seat for that price. Sacha Lord. Care it’s a great question, Lord. (“are it’s a great question, julie, and fully Lord. Care it’s a great question, Julie, and fully support HSZ. It has julie, and fully support HSZ. It has to go to Julie, and fully support HSZ. It has to go to Manchester. Even though we don’t know how much it will cost? This is the thing I can’t get my head around, from a business point of view. Somebody in the department has been paid a lot of money to set out -- sit has been paid a lot of money to set out —— sit down and budget HSZ, has been paid a lot of money to set out —— sit down and budget H52, and out -- sit down and budget H52, and they came up out —— sit down and budget H52, and they came up with 38 billion, then 60 billion, and now it is nearer 100 million. How can somebody get million. How ran somebody get something million. How can somebody get something so wrong? I million. How can somebody get something so wrong? Ijust find it unfashionable. Click Geoff Norcott. unfashionable. (lick Geoff Norcott. The way the unfashionable. Click Geoff Norcott. The way the quote is going up, they must be using the same builder I do, he keeps going, that will be... Is it true, james, he keeps going, that will be... Is it true, James, that part of the it true, james, that part of the expanding it true, James, that part of the expanding price is because they have asked the procurement policy look across such a big timeframe, like, 25 years? I wonder, if that is where the wiggle room is, and Boris strapped something on and perhaps they slightly change the rubric for procurement, they be free up enough money to deliver greater services in the north. Do you support HS2? I the north. Do you support HST! I worry, if not the north. Do you support HS2? I worry, if not HSZ, what? And I think worry, if not HSZ, what? And Ithink there is a worry, if not HSZ, what? And I think there is a problem in this country, with all respect to the people of Birmingham, if you look of the population and significance of London, this country is unlike many others. In Spain, there are Madrid and Barcelona, there are New York and Chicago, but London skews the whola country, and Chicago, but London skews the whole country, so it has to be done, whola country, so it has to be done, just not at any whole country, so it has to be done, just not at any cost. Minette whole country, so it has to be done, just not at any cost. Minette, what is your view? Is it the best return on investment, or would that investment be better made in Northern Rail and delivering on a much broader basis? For Northern Rail and delivering on a much broader basis? Forfarmers, much broader basis? For farmers, this has much broader basis? Forfarmers, this has been absolutely huge. It’s been ongoing for ten years. We have had land been ongoing for ten years. We have had [and that has been compulsorily had land that has been compulsorily purchased, had [and that has been compulsorily purchased, houses being compulsorily purchased, and in many cases that transaction has not been completed, those farmers have not been paid for that, they have sacrificed businesses. I have had farmers with tears in their eyes who have had to dose tears in their eyes who have had to close their farm shop, close all of their diversification, wedding businesses, and ten years and still not knowing, so that’s been a massive issue. We have also, I think, got to look at infrastructure think, got to look at infrastmclure and think, got to look at infrastructure and investment and where it goes. This is going through historic ancient woodland that is irreplaceable, and the damage to nature and the environment on the back of that doesn’t seem to be talked about nearly enough. We will talked about nearty enough. We will not replace it talked about nearly enough. We will not replace it with like for like. We do the same with house—building, We do the same with house-building, we don’t We do the same with house—building, we don’t prioritise housing land for where we will produce food, and going forward, with climate change, we have to prioritise infrastructure we have to prioritise infrastmclure and talk we have to prioritise infrastructure and talk about food production, about nature, and we have to be responsible across society. Do you think we should go ahead? Little of a return on the investment? 50 many a return on the investment? So many people don’t a return on the investment? 50 many people don’t know. —— will it peopla don’t know. -- will it deliver a people don’t know. —— will it deliver a return. Only people don’t deliver a return. Only peopla don’t know deliver a return. Only people don’t know about the businesses it has destroyed, the woodland it will destroy, and what those farmers in that part of the country feel, in Warwickshire and Staffordshire, is they need an ombudsman to represent them to make the case. It has been them to make the use. It has been ten years. So you them to make the case. It has been ten years. So you haven’t taken a view on this yet, in terms of representing farmers? We have taken a view to represent farmers and make sure their concerns are heard, but nobody has no if it will happen or not, and its destroyed lives in its wake, so we have to look at infrastructure, where it will go, in infrastmclure, where it will go, in the whola infrastructure, where it will go, in the whole round, and the point infrastructure, where it will go, in the whole round, and the pointJulie the whole round, and the point julie makes is, is the whole round, and the pointJulie makes is, is that investment not betting to Northern Rail as a whole, on a wider basis, rather than just HSZ, with all of the ramifications? I get the feeling, and looking at your face is now, I get the feeling, and looking at yourface is now, that we I get the feeling, and looking at your face is now, that we could talk about rail all night. Let’s not do that, because you put lots of other questions in, that, because you put lots of other questions in, so I’m going to move on but, before I do that, just to 55V on but, before I do that, just to say that next week we will be in Hopkinton in Hertfordshire, and the week after that we will be in Dundee, joined by crime writer Val McDermid. If you want to be in the audience, all McDermid. If you want to be in the audience, call this number or go to audience, all this number or go to the audience, call this number or go to the website. Let’s get off rail for now, and hope we will go back later. Jennifer we will go back later. jennifer Murphy. Is it we will go back later. Jennifer Murphy. Is it really safe to apply anyone out of Wuhan back to the UK, given anyone out of Wuhan hack to the UK, given the anyone out of Wuhan back to the UK, given the severity of the coronavirus? Would you rather that we left them there, honestly? Yes, I think they should be quarantined there. Even it is like a plague, it seems, I there. Even it is like a plague, it seems, Idon’t there. Even it is like a plague, it seems, I don’t know the mortality rate and whether it kills everybody who is affected, I don’t know, but I think they should stay there. It isn’t killing everybody affected, because thousands of people have been affected and over a hundred had died, but it certainly hasn’t, otherwise there would be about 7000 people dead. Geoff Norcott, leave them there? I was really hoping you’d come for me on this! It is one of these things, these new stories ticking over, so when I’m watching Question Time, I often think, you don’t know what you are talking about, make, let somebody else have a go, so I will keep brief... Good for you! Nobody has ever said that on my time on Question Time! Do you think we know what we are talking about? Whereas this is an issue about? whereas this is an issue where about? Whereas this is an issue where China is historically sometimes a bit guarded in this respect, they are being quite open, and I think that’s constructive, but I will let the experts take over. You are looking quite exercised about it. I can’t quite understand what is going on because first of all we are told there will be self isolation, secondly, we are told there is quarantine. Yes, they will be a hospital. Then we are told they will be coming back by playing together and go to a military building, where they will be together until there is no symptom appearing, and so, also, what will happen in the aeroplane with the air conditioning, with the 200 people conditioning, with the 200 peopla coming back conditioning, with the 200 people coming back together? I am a bit concerned about these people coming back. In case one infected person back. In use one infected person would back. In case one infected person would infect everybody else? Yes, infecting the whole plane. Since january, infecting the whole plane. Since January, there are 1500 that january, there are 1500 that actually January, there are 1500 that actually come back actually come back from China, Wuhan, and only if you have been trackabla, Wuhan, and only if you have been trackable, apparently. So where are trackabla, apparently. So where are these peopla, trackable, apparently. So where are these people, and are the public at risk? We haven’t had an outbreak yet. Fergus Walsh was on television yet. Fergus Walsh was on telavision saying it, and it yet. Fergus Walsh was on television saying it, and it was also in the papers about the amount, in the newspapers, in the Guardian and Telegraph. Sacha Lord, should we be Telagraph. Sacha Lord, should we be ﬂying peopla Telegraph. Sacha Lord, should we be flying people back? We have seen ﬂying people back? We have seen lots of flying people back? We have seen lots of people on the news desperate to come home. On that, I am not qualified to answer to come home. On that, I am not qualified to answerJennifer’s qualified to answer jennifer’s question, qualified to answerJennifer’s question, but I did find out qualified to answerJennifer’s question, but I did find outlast question, but I did find out last week, a fact question, but I did find outlast week, a fact I never knew, that Wuhan is twinned with Manchester, which is a new one for me. I think the government did a really, really poor job, the government did a really, really poorjob, actually, when the news poor job, actually, when the news first broke, poorjob, actually, when the news first broke, so there are 9 million peopla. To first broke, so there are 9 million people. To give you an idea, Manchester is 2.8 million, Scotland is 5 million. Their advice was to get out of the area. When it is get out of the area. when it is under get out of the area. When it is under lockdown and there is no pub“: under lockdown and there is no public transport and you can’t drive, you have got people watching drive, you have got peopla watching on the drive, you have got people watching on the news, clinic and for their lives, skying interview is over, how are you supposed to get out?! Panicking for their lives. And I see today that there is a plane, people being ﬂown today that there is a plane, people being flown back to the Wirral, but being ﬂown back to the “ﬁnal, but I think it being flown back to the Wirral, but I think it was too little, too late, and we should have followed other countries’ examples. The woman in countries“ examples. The woman in the glasses. I am countries’ examples. The woman in the glasses. I am a local GP and, the glasses. I am a [oral GP and, with regards to the glasses. I am a local GP and, with regards to the coronavirus, I with regards to the coronavims, I think the with regards to the coronavirus, I think the government have done a good job. I think the government have done a goodjob. I have think the government have done a good job. I have a brilliant amount of information very quickly. I think the problem is the press, they are scaremongering, not giving the right information. APPLAUSE Let’s have some of it now. Hopefully, Fergus is doing a reasonable job. Hopefully, Fergus is doing a reasonablejob. What Hopefully, Fergus is doing a reasonable job. What about what the reasonabla job. what about what the lady was reasonable job. What about what the lady was saying there about everybody coming back on the plane, and will they end up infecting each other? It’s an incredibly contagious form of the flu virus, essentially, form of the ﬂu virus, essentially, and what form of the flu virus, essentially, and what nobody ever talks about is the military staff and medical staff, the military staff and mediral staff, they the military staff and medical staff, they are likely to be carriers and are going to infect peopla, but carriers and are going to infect people, but where do they go? Almost peopla, but where do they go? Almost as many people, but where do they go? Almost as many questions as answers. Sarah? 150 peopla are as many questions as answers. Sarah? 150 people are flying back tonight. 150 peopla are ﬂying back tonight. Possibly, as 150 people are flying back tonight. Possibly, as we speak. Was this the right move? I wouldn’t claim to be an expert. I think the point about China doing the right thing this time is right, they have been much more open, and I think, you know, more open, and Ithink, you know, I’m not making a more open, and I think, you know, I’m not making a point about exit but I’m just saying, when we leave, we need to make sure we have got those cross government, cross country working together, because actually this has no borders. I think there has been criticism of the government in that they have been a bit slower to act than other countries. I think the information that peopla countries. I think the information that people have got has been, and maybe it is the government’s full, maybe it’s the public health role to get that information out, but are peopla being get that information out, but are people being screened or not? Are they being brought or not? We have heard interviews on the radio with people in Wuhan who are trying to peopla in Wuhan who are trying to come back, people in Wuhan who are trying to come back, who feel they are on their own and not getting the help they need. Do you think it’s the right thing to bring them back? Of course, if we can, and I think course, if we ran, and I think quarantine is course, if we can, and I think quarantine is the sensible approach. I would say that we do public—health I would say that we do public-health really well in I would say that we do public—health really well in this country, but there has been a huge cut to the budgets, and our diplomatic service is at a 20 year low in terms of funding, so the embassy, in China they will be struggling, and we will be struggling with our public health be stmggling with our public health approach be struggling with our public health approach because we don’t have the resources we once had but I think, is a country, we tend to be quite good at managing these crises, and we all need to make sure we are not trying to scaremonger. A lot of trying to sraremonger. A lot of ﬂights have trying to scaremonger. A lot of flights have now been cancelled ﬂights have now been ancellad coming in flights have now been cancelled coming in and out of the whole of coming in and out of the whola of China. coming in and out of the whole of China. There are a lot of people in the whole of China that might need to come back and, if this escalates quickly, we need to know what is the government plans to its just been declared a global emergency by the World Health Organisation tonight from an NFU perspective, I am not from an NFU perspective, lam not entirely sure from an NFU perspective, I am not entirely sure what your view on this would be, but entirely sure what your view on this would be, butJennifer’s point, would be, butjennifer’s point, don’t would be, butJennifer’s point, don’t think it is a good idea to fly don’t think it is a good idea to ﬂy peopla back, don’t think it is a good idea to fly people back, despite the pleading we have been hearing over the airwaves. jennifer, I have been hearing over the airwaves. Jennifer, I sympathise with that, jennifer, I sympathise with that, but I Jennifer, I sympathise with that, but I think if you or I were out there we would probably be pretty desperate to come back. You know, it’s a really complex virus, and it ran it’s a really complex virus, and it ranjump from it’s a really complex virus, and it canjumpfrom animal it’s a really complex virus, and it canjumpfrom animalto it’s a really complex virus, and it canjump from animal to human, and ranjump from animal to human, and it shows canjump from animal to human, and it shows how different China is to hear. This was at a wet market in Wuhan where they bring in live animals, they have snakes, marmots and bats, and the feeling is that and hats, and the feeling is that this jumped and bats, and the feeling is that this jumped from a bat and bats, and the feeling is that this jumped from a bet to a domestic this jumped from a hat to a domestic animal, and that was how it was passed on to humans. I think there are big lessons to be learnt in how these things are spread, how these vimses these things are spread, how these viruses spread, how they mutate, and vimses spread, how they mutate, and it is a real viruses spread, how they mutate, and it is a real lesson, I guess, in the whola it is a real lesson, I guess, in the whole standards. China had that horrendous outbreak whereby they had contaminated baby milk, and they put 56,000 babies in hospital, and so contaminated baby milk, and they put 56,000 babies in hospital, and sol think we have to learn from what has happened, and I am sure the Chinese, they seem to have reacted really quickly to this, but they will have big lassons quickly to this, but they will have big lessons to learn on the back of big lassons to learn on the back of this that, if you big lessons to learn on the back of this that, if you have live animals, wild animals coming into markets where there is food being sold, this is how these things can jump, where there is food being sold, this is how these things canjump, and is how these things ranjump, and it’s is how these things canjump, and it’s enormously dangerous, and now we have a global situation on the back of it, potentially on the back of one bat. How can the UK and the international community pressurise China into closing down these wet markets that deal in endangered species and create these zoonotic vimses species and create these zoonotic viruses which jump species? How can vimses which jump species? How ran we pressurise viruses which jump species? How can we pressurise them to close them down? We have had this one, Sars and avian ﬂu. And the lady at the front? After the people have been in quarantine for two weeks, what happens if they taught the two weeks, what happens if they caught the virus while they were taught the virus while they were there, caught the virus while they were there, within the two weeks? Will there, within the two weeks? will they be there, within the two weeks? Will they be monitored after being in quarantine? James, I’m sure you have quarantine? james, I’m sure you have been quarantine? James, I’m sure you have been briefed quarantine? james, I’m sure you have been briefed up quarantine? James, I’m sure you have been briefed up to the gills on this subject as the flight has gone to subject as the ﬂight has gone to pick these subject as the flight has gone to pick these people up. 150 people are pick these peopla up. 150 peopla are coming back, pick these people up. 150 people are coming back, 50 from other EU countries. They are going to this place in the Wirral where they will place in the wirral where they will stay for two place in the Wirral where they will stay for two weeks and then what? Firstly, the simple answer to your question, Jennifer, is it is question, jennifer, is it is absolutely question, Jennifer, is it is absolutely right to bring these people home. We have a responsibility and we are making good on that. We are lucky in the UK that we have some genuine world—class experts in disease management. And when these things happen, the people involved in the days have done exercises, they have practised their procedures, they have practised... The GP, I didn’t catch your name, I apologise, is catch your name, Iapologise, is right. We catch your name, I apologise, is right. We disseminate information to medical practitioners so they know what to expect, they know the parameters and the isolation that we are putting people into will be are putting peopla into will be designed are putting people into will be designed specifically to make sure that before people are allowed back into wider community, they are no longer a medical risk. These things are done incredibly professionally and as I say, we should as a country he very proud that we have got some be very proud that we have got some very experienced practitioners in this and we have this and we have exercised ten Pipe, my mother is from Syria, we had a fantastic response to the Ebola vims. fantastic response to the Ebola virus. This is incredibly scary, I understand that and it is of legitimate people are worried but we are global experts in dealing with this kind of thing. The fact the Chinese have been very open, that they have communicated with the international community, that they are sharing information I think it’s to their credit and has helped the global medical community deal with what is a very, very concerning situation. What can we all expect to situation. what ran we all expect to happen now? situation. What can we all expect to happen now? Coronavirus in every happen now? Coronavims in every region in China, happen now? Coronavirus in every region in China, declared a global emergency by the World Health Organization which bring certain procedures, such as for example stopping all flights to China, extraordinary though that may sound. What extraordinary though that may sound. what ran extraordinary though that may sound. What can we expect to follow now? I what ran we expect to follow now? I am not going to What can we expect to follow now? I am not going to speculate. I think we all agree on the panel, I don’t pretend to know enough about the procedures. But in terms of government policy? I’m not going to speculate. This is one of those areas where we do have experts, medical experts, who are experienced and practised. They have done training exercises around this kind of thing. We will rely on those experts to use the experience that therve got to experts to use the experience that they’ve got to guide government therve got to guide government policy and they’ve got to guide government policy and our reaction. But the point I would say is the headlines around these things can be around these things ran be incredibly around these things can be incredibly disconcerting but we are, as I say, amongst the best in the world with dealing with these things. 0K. There is another subject we had a lot of questions about this evening because, of course, tonight is Thursday, tomorrow... Is Friday. What is Thursday, tomorrow... Is Friday. what happens is Thursday, tomorrow... Is Friday. What happens tomorrow? My goodness! what happens tomorrow? My goodness! I spent all last What happens tomorrow? My goodness! I spent all last year talking about it last year. Tomorrow is Brexit day. Taxi! I’ve got mine already. jonathan day. Taxi! I’ve got mine already. Jonathan Hodson? jonathan Hodson? Are Jonathan Hodson? Are those that voted Remain mardy or justified in trying to curtail celebrations tomorrow? CHUCKLES What celebrations tomorrow? CHUCKLES what is your celebrations tomorrow? CHUCKLES What is your view, Geoff? I am glad what is your view, Geoff? I am glad we ran What is your view, Geoff? I am glad we can move forward, the general we ran move forward, the general election gave we can move forward, the general election gave 650 MP5 grow up tablet. I was sick of the bickering. Implemented the resort we would be further ahead. Would you like celebrations tomorrow? I’m not bothered, I’m glad we had some direction on businesses and entrepreneurs and people like that ran entrepreneurs and people like that can move this country forward. ran move this country forward. Geoff, can move this country forward. Geoff, Jonathan’s question, are Geoff, jonathan’s question, are those Geoff, Jonathan’s question, are those who voted remained being Mahdi? I am with Geoff! In a weird way, the Remainers are in the best position to throw a party, they have the food, the drugs, stockpile is! We get the idea. Listen, it’s interesting now, it feels oddly chilled out. In a strange way. It chillad out. In a strange way. It almost chilled out. In a strange way. It almost feels like you remember the film the Truman show when it film the Tmman show when it finished film the Truman show when it finished and everyone started watching something else? I’m glad we are at that point because there has been so much rancour over the point and I think the vast majority of peopla lean and I think the vast majority of people lean one way or the other and weirdly at this point I’m thinking back to a referendum day because we have all got lost in other arguments we may be have all got lost in other arguments we may he were not thinking about at the time. I didn’t go there with any ill will in my heart. I went there and I wasn’t thinking about Empire. I wasn’t feeling anything xenophobic. I definitely wasn’t thinking about blue passports but they are the best colour for a passport, but that is another issue! I was offered the chance for Britain to end the political relationship that had changed drastically since we that had changed drastically since wejoined that had changed drastically since we joined the EU that had changed drastically since wejoined the EU and I took it. I think it’s going to be OK. I know peopla might think it’s going to be OK. I know people might scoff at that sort of peopla might scoff at that sort of optimism people might scoff at that sort of optimism but consumer confidence, business morale are genuine things. I will go on record, this will probably be the thing that bites and on the backside but I think the economy will really motor this year. I think the jobs market will remain buoyant, I think England will win Euro 2020. Steady on! Make no apologies for being optimistic. APPLAUSE Right, Sarah? Is this a moment of celebration or if nothing else, celabration or if nothing else, coming celebration or if nothing else, coming together? I have nine—year—old twin boys and they nine-year-old twin boys and they have five nine—year—old twin boys and they have five football mates coming for a shepover have five football mates coming for a sleepover tomorrow night so have five football mates coming for a sleepover tomorrow night sol have five football mates coming for a sleepover tomorrow night so I will a shepover tomorrow night so I will spend that a sleepover tomorrow night so I will spend that night locked in my bedroom drinking a glass of wine, with seven boys running about the with seven boys mnning about the house! with seven boys running about the house! But it is really important moment and I think we need to recognise both sides of this Brexit debate. For many people, being part of the European Union meant something very important to them. It meant something about partnership, something about progress, something about having that voice that meant we could say no to those big global powers if we needed to because we stood together. We need to recognise that, that is what I also felt about being in the European Union. But there was always that gap where there were people that didn’t feel that way and they didn’t believe that that was what European Union was so here we are and we are leaving. Whilst I won’t be celebrating, I think that both sides, you know, Leavers felt they didn’t recognise their country any more and Remainers now are thinking, I want to salvage what I love from my country. We all want our country back, right? That’s where we are. We want to move back, right? That’s where we are. We wa nt to move forward. back, right? That’s where we are. We want to move forward. I think the “Y want to move forward. I think the way I would disagree with what you were saying is there’s a lot more that we need to pick here. We have no idea what our immigration strategy will become a government is tying itself in knots already about trade relationships. We don’t know what kind of deal we are going to get what kind of deal we are going to set by what kind of deal we are going to get by the end of the year, it is probably going to be a very small one. We’re probably not going to fix the services, we have the problem with Northern Ireland actually, the economy has already taken a beating over the last few years, there are problems here. But I think, Boris problams here. But I think, Boris johnson prohlams here. But I think, Boris johnson might problems here. But I think, Boris Johnson might have been the man to johnson might have been the man to kind of Johnson might have been the man to kind of win the Brexit war but I don’t know if he is the man to bring the peace, do you know what I mean? He is not necessarily the man who is going to put in the hard graft to get this done, not necessarily the man who wants to bring people man who wants to bring peopla together. man who wants to bring people together. He has never talked about levelling up the country until he won some seats in the north of the country and I worry about that. I think that is why he won their seats. I share your optimism about our country because I love our country and we are all brilliant but this is the moment when we need to come together. The woman at the back with the dark hair? I was a Remainer, I voted with the dark hair? I was a Remainer, Ivoted Remain. I with the dark hair? I was a Remainer, Ivoted Remain. lam hugely relieved the decision has been made and we are moving forward. I think it has given an incredible sign for business and confidence has been boosted and I hope we will have an incredibly prosperous year as a result. What will you be doing tomorrow? Probably having a glass of wine. Do lady a little further forward with the blonde hair? As a student looking to do a year abroad next year with the Erasmus scheme, it’s a worrying time for us because we don’t know what is going on. Is there any certainty that you ran put out to on. Is there any certainty that you can put out to students who are ran put out to students who are looking to do a can put out to students who are looking to do a year abroad, that our grants will be secure, that we will be able to go on these opportunities, because we are replying and this could change by the summer so we might not even be accepted to the partner universities? James, I will come universities? james, I will come back to you in a universities? James, I will come back to you in a moment if I may. Minette, from your perspective is tomorrow 3 day of celebration of the tomorrow a day of celebration of the release tomorrow 3 day of celebration of the release of coming together? I have had about five hours sleep in the last few days so hopefully I will be unconscious! LAUGHTER unconscious! MUGHTER I hope unconscious! LAUGHTER I hope that is because you have been partying! LAUGHTER partying! MUGHTER | partying! LAUGHTER I wish! Look, for us, partying! LAUGHTER Iwish! Look, for us, it’s partying! LAUGHTER I wish! Look, for us, it’s now about... This has been democratic, we are leaving, the Prime Minister has a really strong mandate now which is good because it concludes things and we can move on. But this things and we ran move on. But this is about getting things and we can move on. But this is about getting Brexit right. We have done effectively the easy hit, signed off the withdrawal agreement and we are going, leaving tomorrow. But now we have to focus on getting Brexit right and for as that is all about trade. For each and every one of you in this room, that is all about the food you will be eating, about maintaining our standards of animal welfare, about maintaining our standards of animalwelfare, maintaining our animal welfare, maintaining our standards animalwelfare, maintaining our standards of environmental protection. We have to get Brexit right was that we have a once—in—a—lifetime chance to design once-in-a-lifetime chance to design our own once—in—a—lifetime chance to design our own trade policy, our own. The responsibility of that lies with this government. Huge pressure on them but I do think we need to work in partnership, we need to shape it and we need to be really clear about what we want. I will and we need to be really clear about what we want. I willjust say, it’s what we want. I will just say, it’s very what we want. I willjust say, it’s very interesting that the voice of consumers has said standards must be maintained no matter what. Price is important, choice is important, consumer rights is important but nothing, nothing at the expense of standards. They go on to say that 70% of consumers really have no idea 7096 of consumers really have no idea about 70% of consumers really have no idea about trade policy, have no idea about how this will impact on the food in our about how this will impact on the food in ourfridges. So there is food in our fridges. So there is huge food in ourfridges. So there is huge responsibility on us to challenge government to work with government, to make sure this isn’t about getting Brexit done but getting Brexit right. Brexit is done, we are leaving, let’s make sure we get it right for everybody in this room. APPLAUSE We may come back to that in a bit more detail in a moment. Sacha? Are you planning some huge rave tomorrow night? I you planning some huge rave tomorrow night? Ithink it is you planning some huge rave tomorrow night? I think it is going to be a very muted... We are entering this transition period. The student there that mention 12 months. I don’t think the transition period will be finished in 12 months, I really don’t. Tomorrow will bring on—site don’t. Tomorrow will bring on-site relief for don’t. Tomorrow will bring on—site relief for me. The three and a half years we have had this cloud over us of negativity, of hatred. I think we have actually lost sight on local matters that really do matter. For example, across the whole of the UK, there is a big homelessness issue. We are very lucky in Greater Manchester that the every night campaign, we have seen a reduction in homelessness. But we need to look at that, look at the NHS, we have a problem with knife crime. I think once this is out of the way tomorrow, we can concentrate on tomorrow, we ran concentrate on issues tomorrow, we can concentrate on issues that really matter locally. I’m quite relieved about it. Regarding the night—time economy, Regarding the night-time economy, you know, Regarding the night—time economy, you know, James, I know you got a you know, james, I know you got a degree in you know, James, I know you got a degree in hospitality, actually. Speaking to people who work within Speaking to peopla who work within the Speaking to people who work within the night—time economy, in the night-time economy, in hospitality, the night—time economy, in hospitality, especially in hotels, which so many Europeans who do not know what is going to happen in the next 12 months, there is so much uncertainty. Likewise in the NHS, there is so much uncertainty. I’m watching it with interest at what will happen, but for me, it’s going to create slight beliefs. So, will happen, but for me, it’s going to create slight beliefs. 50, James. to create slight beliefs. So, james. A number to create slight beliefs. 50, James. A number of things to pick up. The original question was from Jonathan original question was from jonathan about original question was from Jonathan about our Remainers being killjoys about celebrating tomorrow night? I notice Nigel Farage has said his passion Parliament Square, he is not passion Partiament Square, he is not allowed passion Parliament Square, he is not allowed her passion Parliament Square, he is not allowed herfireworks, musical allowed her fireworks, musical alcohol. allowed herfireworks, musical alcohol. Doesn’t sound much like a to me! No party I would want to go to me! No party I would wantto go to. On that to me! No party I would want to go to. On that basis, are you trying to not celebrate too much tomorrow? Are you trying to ride two horses? And how to train for the government in that sense but you don’t want to look triumphalist. You had serious questions from the student for exampla? What I would say is, if you want to what I would say is, if you want to celebrate What I would say is, if you want to celebrate tomorrow night, then do so, have fun, but I would also say, if you know people for whom this is if you know peopla for whom this is not a if you know people for whom this is not a moment of celebration, don’t mb their not a moment of celebration, don’t rub their noses in it, because the mb their noses in it, because the big mh their noses in it, because the big thing mb their noses in it, because the big thing about rub their noses in it, because the big thing about this is that a question was asked, and it was a question that had been rumbling question that had been mmbling along below question that had been rumbling along below the surface for a very long time, and it needed to be resolved. The question was asked, the country answered, everyone promised that they would abide by the decision and it turned out that only the Conservative Party meant it. We ended up having a general election, in large part on this issue, and the question was answered for a second time, which is why tomorrow night we are leaving the EU. There are people for whom that EU. There are peopla for whom that is worrying, and EU. There are people for whom that is worrying, and we are absolutely determined to make sure that, if you are a European national in the UK, you know your settled status will be guaranteed. If you are a student who wants to study abroad? We have committed to the Erasmus scheme, the Prime Minister is an internationalist and said we want to be good global member, he says we will maintain animal welfare, consumer safety, employment standards. For the people who want standards. For the peopla who want to standards. For the people who want to celebrate, for whom it is a positive thing, right, enjoy tomorrow evening, and for the people who had or perhaps still have genuine worries about what this change of relationship with the EU will mean, we are absolutely determined to calm your concerns and demonstrate that the UK will be a globally engaged, high standard, good global player, and we don’t need the EU to make us fat. We are a wonderful country, and we don’t have to be forced to be wonderful because of being in the EU. What about of being in the EU. what about protecting of being in the EU. What about protecting standards? We have some of the highest animal welfare standards in the world, that is not going to change. But we are talking about our standards, and we always said we wanted to maintain our standards, but the point is about imports which come into this country where will that legislation sit? where will that lagislation sit? It’s where will that legislation sit? It’s not in the agricultural bill, which we have written many farming organisations, 60 environmentalist as well to the Prime Minister, saying, where does that legislation saying, where does that lagislation sit? It saying, where does that legislation sit? It should be in the agricultural bill. Still no reply from where will the legislation sit? Otherwise, we from where will the legislation sit? Otherwise, wejust from where will the legislation sit? Otherwise, we just allow food in that would be illegal to produce here. APPLAUSE One thing I have never understood... If you will indulge me, I have always been a bit envious and I’d like to do this... I would like the audience to put their hands up if what they really want post Brexit is a massive reduction in food standards. Plan, Croke no, don’t answer that question, but that is not what the net but is asked, she says, why have you not committed to maintaining food standards in the agriculture bill? The point I’m making is that, now that the British government is fully responsible to the British public for things like trade policy on immigration policy and that, we will respond to the desires of the British people, and there is no desire to scrap our animal welfare standards, our desire to scrap our animal welfare standards, ourfood hygiene standards, our food hygiene standards. standards, ourfood hygiene standards. Why didn’t you put it in standards. why didn’t you put it in the bill? standards. Why didn’t you put it in the bill? The British people do not the bill? The British peopla do not want it to the bill? The British people do not want it to happen and therefore it will not happen, because this government will respond to the needs and the wants of the British people, and the wants of the British peopla, and that and the wants of the British people, and that is how a democracy should work. That is what Brexit is all about. So, if people want something, about. So, if peopla want something, you don’t put it about. So, if people want something, you don’t put it in law? I am confused about that. APPLAUSE We have got high animal welfare standards. This country, under a Tory Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool, introduced the first animal welfare legislation in the world. We are a lagislation in the world. We are a nation of legislation in the world. We are a nation of animal lovers. We are not going to drop our standards, and it’s not the EU that forces that are upon us, it is what we want to do, and I can’t understand why people and I can’t understand why peopla struggle to and I can’t understand why people struggle to understand that. Because you have to legislate it. I don’t you have to lagislate it. I don’t think you you have to legislate it. I don’t think you need to legislate it. I think you need to lagislate it. I think james think you need to legislate it. I thinkJames is right, it needs to be think james is right, it needs to be consumer thinkJames is right, it needs to be consumer led and, with education, I consumer lad and, with education, I don’t think consumer led and, with education, I don’t think this audience particularly needs educating, we all particularty needs educating, we all live in particularly needs educating, we all live in the Peak District and we see the animals we eat, food welfare, nobody is going to go around Tesco and read the agricultural policy and look to see what is in legislation look to see what is in lagislation and look to see what is in legislation and what is not, what they need to see is things that are clearly labelled, not see is things that are clearly labelled, notjust with the welfare labelled, not just with the welfare issue, on labelled, notjust with the welfare issue, on the front cover of a steak I would love to see where it has come from, I want to see how environmental that farmer has been, I want the scoring for that and its welfare, and I want to see the traceability of it, to see exactly what sort of animal it is. It sounds like you have experience? I am a farmer. I’d like to see cows graded in a green way, so a farmer. I’d like to see cows graded in a green way, so 3 Harry Hill cow in a green way, so a Harry Hill cow that is living on in a green way, so 3 Harry Hill cow that is living on the more in a green way, so a Harry Hill cow that is living on the more that is promoting bird and insect health, I would like to see that steak being branded as a green hairy cow, as opposed to a mass produced, factory produced animal, and the same for chicken. Who here would stand up and chicken. who here would stand up and say, yes, I chicken. who here would stand up and say, yes, lam chicken. Who here would stand up and say, yes, I am going to eat chlorinated chicken from the US? They are not. Is chlorinated chicken definitely not something we are ever going to see in this country as a result of a deal with the US? And Michael Gove was Environment Secretary, he said that isn’t on the table, it’s not what we are going to do do the American Secretary of State will try and negotiate the best deal he ran will try and negotiate the best deal he can for the Americans and, you he ran for the Americans and, you know what, if he can for the Americans and, you know what, if there are things we don’t want in that deal, we will say so. So we are not having chlorinated chicken? Of course not! Hands up who fancies chlorinated chicken? Why fancies chlorinated chicken? why would fancies chlorinated chicken? Why would we want to import a load of it when nobody would eat it? We haven’t got much more time to one more question from Catherine Whelpton. question from Catherine whelpton. The average question from Catherine Whelpton. The average age of owning a mobile phone is becoming younger. Should we be concerned? I assume you are talking about a report which came out today saying that more than half of children, just more than half of children, own a mobile by age seven. Sacha Lord, should we be concerned? I don’t think it’s the mobile phone in itself we should be concerned about, it is perhaps the apps, the social media. Everybody is now all about Instagram, Twitter, and I don’t know if you have that thing on your phone which tells you how many hours you spent on it in a week, when that pops up it’s scary, and I think more so than the phone should concerned about that. I’ve got a son that is coming up to four years old and, if he ever sees this, he is not getting a mobile phone by the age of seven! He will probably have a driving licence before having a mobile phone. As a parent, good luck with that! But the four—year—old, with that! But the four-year-old, but the driving with that! But the four—year—old, but the driving licence bid. I don’t understand why a seven—year—old understand why a seven-year-old needs a understand why a seven—year—old needs a mobile phone, and we all know we are addicted to them, we know the potential damage, and one of the jobs as a parent is to say no. I remember, if of the jobs as a parent is to say no. I remember, ifI of the jobs as a parent is to say no. I remember, if I said to my mum, everybody else is doing it, she would give me a predictable answer, berause would give me a predictable answer, because it isn’t necessarily an end in itself it is rare that I am shocked by statistics, but over half shocked by statistic, but over half of kids shocked by statistics, but over half of kids have got a mobile phone by age seven, I think people have to stand their ground. The woman in the red top. Is a teacher, we use mobile phones in schools and in colleges to help the students to find vocabulary to research things and be able to find things and, as you said, it’s about being able to use technology in the way forward. I am pretty sure that most parents properly give a that most parents property give a phone to that most parents properly give a phone to their young children at some point, may be to keep them busy, may be to keep them safe if they are walking home from somewhere for the first time, but it’s about the safety of that child from other people and the element of keeping up with the Joneses for my friend has people and the element of keeping up with theJoneses for my friend has a with the joneses for my friend has a phone, with theJoneses for my friend has a phone, everybody has one, I want one. Driving that down so much lower, it will make a massive impact. You have children going for meals at age two and three, sat at a table, parents give their phone to keep them occupied rather than engaging in conversation. engaging in conversation. Have your two nine—year—olds got mobiles? two nine-year-olds got mobilas? know. My two nine—year—olds got mobiles? know. My ten—year—old is top your know. My ten-year-old is top your primary, and she know. My ten—year—old is top your primary, and she brought me back a list of all the people in her class list of all the peopla in her class who had list of all the people in her class who had mobile phones she did her research, and about 95% of people research, and about 9596 of peopla had a research, and about 9596 of people had a phone, research, and about 95% of people had a phone, and the school allow you to take your phone in top year primary, so the school is telling you it’s OK, you’ve got all the other kids, so she got one for Christmas. There are a few issues, and one is that there is a huge social anxiety associated with having social media all the time, and you’ve got to watch that, you can’t let them have these phones in their bedroom, you can’t let them look at them all the time because, if somebody hasn’t replied, there is an anxiety, and the second thing is you have to make sure that kids know what the dangers are. We can’t assume that we can keep them safe assume that we ran keep them safe from assume that we can keep them safe from everything, and part of what we need to be doing is teaching them where the risks are, what they should look out for how they should themselves online. The third thing is that social media companies need to take is that social media companies need hhha is that social media companies need to take a lot more responsive lady for what is on their platforms, and the government need to tell it legislate for this, because there are some really nasty stuff out there and we can’t protect our kids all the time as a young person, I had a phone from age 11, mainly for safety but also because I wanted to communicate with my friends, and for a lot of children that is the way it is. Mainly for children as well, it sounds weird, but they are more aware of the dangers facing them than people now. I knew what I was than peopla now. I knew what I was facing when I than people now. I knew what I was facing when I was about 13, 14, and I wasn’t going to facing when I was about 13, 1A, and I wasn’t going to go texting 30—year—old men or people who looked 30-year-old men or people who looked creepy, you know 30—year—old men or people who looked creepy, you know what you are doing. It isn’t as cut and dried as people It isn’t as cut and dried as peopla think it is. I It isn’t as cut and dried as people think it is. Ithink It isn’t as cut and dried as people think it is. I think that point is really relevant, I think young people now are so savvy, and I think peopla now are so savvy, and I think education people now are so savvy, and I think education on social media is transformed to what it was even a few years ago. I think seven is far too young. I held off with my children until they were using pub“: children until they were using public transport, and then I let them have a phone. I look forward to meeting Geoff ‘s 17—year—old son meeting Geoff ‘s 17-year-old son without a meeting Geoff ‘s 17—year—old son without a phone! I don’t think it will happen. Obviously a lot of parents are managing, not forever, but I think seven is very young. I agree, absolutely, and we want to be in contact with our children, to be able to know that our children can contact us, and I think 11 is a fair age. You look keen to talk with your hand up. I age. You look keen to talk with your hand up. Iwould age. You look keen to talk with your hand up. I would class a mobile phone for a youngster as a drug, and I don’t really think we understand that dmgs I don’t really think we understand that drugs take different forms. It’s not just that drugs take different forms. It’s notjust about drugs in nightclubs... So It’s notjust about drugs in nightclubs... 50 mobile It’s notjust about drugs in nightclubs... So mobile phone use is a kind of nightclubs... 50 mobile phone use is a kind of addiction? It’s an addiction, it develops dependency and I’ve seen it in my great nephews. They get this equipment, they get it in front of their faces, and they learn the culture of meeting it from the moment they wake “P meeting it from the moment they wake up until we go to bed. —— needing up until we go to bed. -- needing it. (“an we up until we go to bed. —— needing it. Can we not see this as a drug it. (“an we not see this as a dmg issue that it. Can we not see this as a drug issue that actually needs to be addressed? As a really serious issue that’s going to develop dependency in later life? James, briefly, are in later life? james, brieﬂy, are you concerned in later life? James, briefly, are you concerned about the decreasing age at which kids are using mobile phones? I didn’t see the report, but seven shocks me. Having that number of children that young. I think that, I hear what you are saying about young people being more savvy, about young peopla being more savvy, and I about young people being more savvy, and I think there is a generation, digital natives, people who are much digital natives, peopla who are much more digital natives, people who are much more used to living their lives in social media, but in the same way that my kids, you teach them about road safety, you teach them about being a bit careful, and I had a very awkward dad conversation about, you know, reminding them that what you upload and sent to your friends never, ever, ever goes away, I you upload and sent to your friends never, ever, ever goes away, Isaid, if you don’t fancy having a picture perhaps brought up during a job interview in 20 years time, perhaps don’t take it and send it to someone, so I had to have some of those awkward conversations. Sarah is right, we need to look at social media companies, and the ombudsman will look at that, and we have to be very conscious about social pressure, addiction, online bullying. There is a lot wrapped up in this, but I think mobile phones are an inevitable part of modern life, but we have to be careful. Could keep talking about this, but I am afraid we are out of time. Could keep talking about this, but I am afraid we are out of time. The hour is up. Let me remind you that next week will be in Hopkinton and the week after in Dundee, so come and join us. -- next the week after in Dundee, so come and join us. —— next week we will be and join us. -- next week we will be in Hopkinton. And, and join us. —— next week we will be in Hopkinton. And, if you’d like to marry on in Hopkinton. And, if you’d like to carry on the conversation, as we tmly put in carry on the conversation, as we truly put in here, you can carry on the conversation, as we truly put in here, you canjoin tmly put in here, you ranjoin Adrian truly put in here, you canjoin Adrian Charles and guests on Question Time Extra Time Maul, Which Question Time Extra Time Maul, which Is On Question Time Extra Time Maul, Which Is On Radio 5 Live Right Now. It just Remains Is On Radio 5 Live Right Now. It Just Remains For Me To Say, Thank just Remains For Me To Say, Thank You To The Just Remains For Me To Say, Thank You To The Panel, I am sorry I couldn’t get read more a few, and thank you to you at home for watching and listening. —— I’m sorry watching and listening. -- I’m sorry I couldn’t get watching and listening. —— I’m sorry I couldn’t get round more of you. From Buxton, goodbye