Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel... Nadhim Zahawi, the government’s business and industry minister, a committed Brexiteer who previously ran an oil company and was a co—founder of the polling organisation YouGov. Labour’s Shadow Secretary for Health and Social Care since 2016, one of the very few people in the Shadow Cabinet to keep the same job after Keir Starmer was elected Labour leader, Jon Ashworth. John Caudwell, billionaire businessman and philanthropist, best known as founder of the mobile phone company, Phones AU and more recently for donating half a million to the Conservatives at the last election. Joining us down the line, writer and journalist Nicci Gerrard, co—author of a string of bestselling novels and winner of the Orwell prize for her work on the care of people with dementia and an expert on the transmission of infectious diseases, professor of theoretical epidemiology at the University of Oxford, Sunetra Gupta. APPLAUSE. Good evening and welcome to my guests here in the studio and to Nicci who joins us down the line from Suffolk and to the virtual audience, thank you very much for being part of this and you are from the Oldham area. Very good to have you with us and of course, if you want to join in the conversation at home, you can follow us in the usual way on social media. So, let us get started, it is ourfirst programme after the summer, we are keen to get going. Our first question tonight is from Niall Bowman. Hello, it has been reported that there are no coronavirus tests available in the top ten hotspots in England. Is this the world—beating test operation that Boris Johnson promised? Jon Ashworth. Well, great question and quite obviously, no, it is not the world beating testing and tracing system that we were promised by the Prime Minister. Look, testing has become a complete shambles. We are in a real mess and we always warned them, the Labour Party warned them, plenty of public health experts warned them, that unless they fix testing and put in place a system of tracing, which is where, if you have been in touch with somebody who has got the virus, that you are contacted and you are asked to isolate yourselves, unless you are putting on a proper effective system, the virus will get out of control. And they did not put in place an effective system. The contact tracing element of test entrees is not contacting enough people, so in Oldham, for example, the call centre that is doing this, which has been given to Serco, a company that did not have any experience of doing this sort of work, only contacted around 50% of people and what happens is, even if people are contacted and asked to isolate, that means taking two weeks off work potentially, and if you are on a zero—hours contract and low pay unscrupulous employer, you cannot always take two weeks off work. By not fixing testing and not fixing this tracing element of it, you allow the infections to rise and what we are now seeing is, I believe, the virus potentially getting out of control and when you lose control of testing and tracing, you do not know where the virus is and you cannot track it. So if we end up having further restrictions, already serious restrictions have been announced, the rule of six, in Oldham you have got restrictions, if we end up having even more severe restrictions in the coming months, and the second dangerous spike in the virus, it is because of this failure to deal and get testing and tracing fixed and ministers should have got in place the extra testing we needed now. Everyone said to them, as go back, as people are encouraged to go back to work, as we move into autumn, whenever there are colds and snifﬂes and so on, that they would be more pressure on the system and ministers did not increase testing to the levels that were needed, so it is not well beaten, it is a shambles and, you know, the British people have made great sacrifices throughout this. People have not seen their families, they have not gone to weddings, they have not even said goodbye to their loved ones at funerals. The British people have honoured their side of the bargain, the government haven’t. They were supposed to fix testing for this winter and I am afraid they have failed. John Caudwell. Well, I think they probably have failed to give a world—class system, but I think that somewhat misses the point altogether, because, first of all, I am not a great believer in testing and tracing. Why not? Purely and simply because the virus takes a while to develop... To form a positive test. 50 To form a positive test. So you’re going to be getting negative test from people who are infected. By the time you’ve got a positive test from those people who are infected, they have already infected lots of other people, without knowing that they have got the virus. Even that is not the central point. The central point is that this virus was deadly, really deadly in April. It was killing around about 18% of people. If you look at the percentage of deaths now, there is only .4% of deaths and of course each one of those is tragic, but it is .4% of deaths instead of 18% and it is the same worldwide. It is the same in Spain, it is the same in France. What that leads you to say is not worry about test and trace, let us worry about why has this virus lost its potency? But how do you know it is not going to get worse again? How do you know that there will not be any more deaths again, as we are seen in other countries? My point is, that there are six potential reasons why this virus is not killing people. We can list them. Briefly. One is that young people are getting tested and that is putting a huge amount of extra positives of asymptomatic young people who are not going to fall ill from it. The second point is that a lot of the people that were vulnerable have already died. The rest of the vulnerable people have been well shielded and well looked after by society and then there is the possibility that the masks that we are wearing and the distancing that we are doing is reducing viral loads and it is not proven, but the possibility of a reduced viral load might mean a reduced illness that the body and the immune system could cope with and fight of whereas an increased load won’t. Would you get rid of testing altogether? No, but let me finish the point, because the most important point of all is coming up, which is, has the virus actually lost its potency? Now, what I think we should be doing, the scientists and the government should be finding out the waiting between these six factors, and if it is number six, which is the virus is losing its potency, we don’t really need to worry, because the deaths will be less than they were with common flu. So, we need to understand that. Would I scrap testing? No, I wouldn’t, because it has a place to play in this, but it is not the be all and end all. The be all and end all is understanding this virus, understanding the six factors and then planning the action according to what we find. Nicci, I saw you shaking your head at some of that. I can’t remember which bits I was shaking my head at. I was just going to say, first of all, in reply to the question, that I quite often feel that we are living through Groundhog Day. This has been going on for over six months and every week or so we are told that testing is just around the corner. We are told that there is this kind of superb system coming our way, but it is another few weeks and another few weeks and it has been six months. What is more, the hyperbolic language that is used about testing, the £100 billion spent on a moonshot, using a technique which as far as I know doesn’t actually exist yet. It feels like a kind of flummery and a way ofjust grandstanding and speaking, as if speaking something will make it true and I think most of the public have ceased believing it true and I think most of the public have ceased believing these promises and then there is the first of what is happening these promises and then there is the farce of what is happening with testing, where most tests you cannot get four days. There is a great backlog, there are teachers not been able to teach, there are doctors not being able to go into hospital, there are carers being kept away from the care homes, most tests, once they have been done, they do not come back in under 2A hours. People are being sent from Oxford to Aberystwyth or Inverness. People are being sent to test centres that don’t actually exist and it feels quite like a farce to me and it also feels that it is a farce that is just eroding trust in any kind of competence in this government and in the meantime, people are being kept separate from each other. I mean, I work for a campaigning group that once family members to go back into care homes, because for six months families have been kept apart in great anguish and suffering and damage and the care homes are waiting for tests, which they are being promised and not being given. Let’s hearfrom some of our audience, you have got your hands up, Ian. Yeah. It is more to do with the government contracts awarded to companies appointed without tenders, using Covid as an excuse to award them, it seemed a bit of a rush. These companies are being paid millions and they have been seen not to work much before, so Ijust think it is going back further to that. It is the awarding of the contracts to these companies who don’t seem to, you know, coordinate everything. 0K, Katie. Yeah, I agree with Nicci. It is a farce. And what made me furious today was whenJacob Rees—Mogg talked about people carping about the testing system. We are not carping here in Oldham and people on this panel who are from Oldham, one of the highest, which has one of the highest rates in the country, I tell you why we need those tests, you know, we need them for our elderly relatives who are ill, because we are worrying about them. We need them for our children, so they can get back to their education. We need them for ourselves so that we can get back to our work, to ourjobs and earn a living. Jacob Rees—Mogg just made me sick today with pushing the blame back on to those of us who are vulnerable. We need those tests to be able to get on with our lives. Nadeem, Jacob Rees—Mogg saying that people should stop endlessly carping, were you happy with his comments? Well, let me try and address the question? Just quickly, because I do want you to get onto that, but given that Katie just mentioned that. No, of course not. Was he wrong to say that? So, let me try and address the question, Fiona. Nial, you are right to say and to challenge on this, because it is difficult and challenging. You know, when we got into this pandemic, we could only do about 2000 tests a day and we are now doing 240,000 tests a day, but clearly there is more demand. You’re not testing 240,000 people a day. 240,000 tests a day at the moment. We plan to increase it to 500,000 by the end of October. There are 250,000 antigen tests today, but you are right to challenge us now, because we have got to do even better. Now, some things have got better, for example, the average distance someone has to travel for a test has come down from 6.4 miles to 5.4 miles, but the in—person test, where the results are then delivered within 2A hours has also come down to 64% today with the data. I am not sitting here trying to hide away from the challenges, we have got to do even better. Can Ijust pick you up on that 240,000? The government’s own figures, the latest figures are that 81,000 people are being tested every day. That is the government’s latest figures. Not 240,000, 81,000. The figures I have here with me... That is the capacity, 81,000 according to the latest figures from the government on the 9th of September, 81,000 a day. Well, the figures that I have got is 240,000, that is the latest figures. The average of people being tested every day? The capacity in the system. We know about the capacity, but in terms of people being tested, which is what everyone here is, if you want a test, the capacity is kind of irrelevant, if you cannot get a test, it does not matter what the capacity is. As I said, there are some challenges. The 90% of people can get to a testing facility within 22 miles of where they are at, but we have to do better which is why we are increasing capacity to half a million by the end of October and of course Test and Trace will get even better. It is running at the moment at just shy of 70%. 360,000 people have been identified and have isolated through their Test and Trace system and we continue. Yesterday, we e—mailed schools so they can actually get a home testing kit to each school and they can go on to a dedicated portal and order those. One kit? No. Ten tests per school. No, there is more going into schools as they need them. The thing with children, of course, the vast majority actually are testing negative, which is good news. 90%, 99% of schools are back with 88% attendance, I think Nicci was talking about how we are doing with the school system, so many challenges, and I would not sit here and claim that this... World beating. That it is going exactly as I would hope to go, but we are constantly improving and some incredible people, incredible scientists, incredible people in the NHS, in our hospitals, in our laboratories, for new laboratories will come online which will increase capacity even more. It’s difficult, but it is the right thing to do. Nobody is denying if question -- if thing to do. Nobody is denying if question —— if testing is the right question -- if testing is the right thing to do, it is question —— if testing is the right thing to do, it is if there is enough. I thing to do, it is if there is enough. Isit thing to do, it is if there is enough. I sit on the committee that looks at this data every day. We identify the spikes which is why with the local leadership, as we with the [oral leadership, as we have just with the local leadership, as we have just done with the local leadership, as we havejust done in with the local leadership, as we have just done in the north—east and have just done in the north-east and by the way, or have just done in the north—east and by the way, or the local Labour MPs by the way, or the [oral labour MPs have been very by the way, or the local Labour MPs have been very supportive this evening. We have announced the additional interventions we are making in the north—east to try and making in the north-east to try and control making in the north—east to try and control the virus. As you will have control the vims. As you will have seen, people in control the virus. As you will have seen, people in the north—east, a seen, people in the north-east, a lot of people seen, people in the north—east, a lot of people are not getting tests lot of peopla are not getting tests and peopla lot of people are not getting tests and people turned up in Sunderland and peopla turned up in Sundertand to a test and people turned up in Sunderland to a test site today and nobody was there to test them. Let’s hear from the audience. Michael. It looks like Nadhim is struggling with that Nadhim is stmggling with that fantasy Nadhim is struggling with that fantasy figure. It’s difficult when you get these numbers which don’t their reality to what is happening. But to respond to the question, nobody wanted a world beating Track and Trace system, we wanted an effective one. Johnson himself blurted out it will be world beating. What is happening clearly beating. what is happening dearty is that beating. What is happening clearly is that the announcement seems to be better rewarded than the actual workability of the system itself. Hello. I believe over 100 schools in the Greater Manchester area have now had to close or have had to send had to dose or have had to send children had to close or have had to send children home in Bubbles because of coronavims, children home in Bubbles because of coronavirus, positive tests. 50 is coronavims, positive tests. So is the view coronavirus, positive tests. 50 is the view of the government that herd immunity is now the best way forward simply because we can’t cope with the amount of tests required and we can’t keep the country in lockdown forever? Martin. After the way Dido Harding handled the data breach at TalkTalk and today saying nobody saw the demand for tests coming, is her credibility and the credibility of the testing system shot and it needs a drastic rethink? Ben. I was the testing system shot and it needs a drastic rethink? Ben. I wasjust a drastic rethink? Ben. Iwas just thinking, going a drastic rethink? Ben. I wasjust thinking, going forward into the winter months, test and traces of vital component for the nation puzzlement health and getting the health service is better prepared. We don’t want to play catch up and when ran We don’t want to play catch up and when can we be expecting a fully when ran we be expecting a fully working Test when can we be expecting a fully working Test and Trace, not world beating but efficient, we working Test and Trace, not world beating but efficient, wejust working Test and Trace, not world beating but efficient, we just need an efficient one? Nadhim, I will come back to you, but Sunetra, the original question is, is this a world beating testing operation is Boris world beating testing operation is BorisJohnson promised? And we have Boris johnson promised? And we have heard BorisJohnson promised? And we have heard whether it is the right way to go anyway. It is of history clearly go anyway. It is of history dearty not a go anyway. It is of history clearly not a world beating go anyway. It is of history clearly not a world heating system. —— it is not a world heating system. -- it is dearty not a not a world heating system. —— it is clearly not a world beating not a world heating system. —— it is clearly not a world heating system. dearty not a world heating system. But the point clearly not a world heating system. But the point you made, John, is But the point you made, john, is this really But the point you made, John, is this really what we want to do? You just said, Fiona, nobody is arguing this is the way forward and we must attest. But I will argue against that. I think we are all talking to a particular narrative, a particular plot, which is that the virus is this nasty thing which may have diminished in nastiness, although I don’t think that’s true. Because don’t think that’s tme. Because what I don’t think that’s true. Because what I think is the virus was never really that nasty to begin with. And how are we are going to deal with it? The only way we can deal with it it? The only way we ran deal with it is by somehow it? The only way we can deal with it is by somehow keeping it under control. When you say it wasn’t that nasty to begin with — 16,000 deaths and counting sounds a pretty nasty thing to lots of people. I mean, what I’m saying is that in relation to flu, or other... I mean, 0K, what I mean by "was it a nasty thing?" is, is it any nastier, or less nasty now, than it was in April? And I mean, it depends, obviously, as you say, whether we consider something that could kill 16,000 people to be nasty. And in relation to other pathogens that we have around that do kill a lot of other people. So, I guess that’s what I meant is — it is virulent, but it’s not necessarily any more virulent than many of the other pathogens we deal with. But really, what I wanted to say was that the reason why this virus was able to kill so many people at that stage was because the risk of being infected among the vulnerable people was really very high in April, and that has diminished. And you mentioned six factors, but there’s a seventh factor, which is that many of us are now immune to this virus. So, what we need to do is really rethink. Yeah, butjust to answer that point, I wasn’t bringing the immunity in because I was talking about the ratio of deaths to cases, so that automatically discounts the immunity factor. No, it doesn’t, actually, because what happens is when a population becomes immune, the risk of infection goes down. And so, what we really want to stop... But that’s the number of cases. I was just talking of the ratio of deaths to cases. Not the cases per population. Can Ijustjump in for a second? Tyra in our audience was saying, is herd immunity the way to go? Is that your view, Sunetra? Um, I’m just saying that there is this other alternative pathway, which is to build up herd immunity, without sacrificing the vulnerable people. And... And I absolutely agree with that. And I’ve been making the point from day one that we should have invested the money into protecting the aged and the vulnerable and let everybody else build up herd immunity. And if you take the number of deaths that there would have been incurred then, I believe there would have been way less doing it that way than what we’re doing cumulatively by the corona deaths that we’ve got, the cancer deaths that we’re going to have, the stroke deaths that we’re going to have, the suicides, the mental illness and the destruction of the economy. This is not lives or the economy, this is lives or lives. I think we’ve handled it wrongly from the beginning. I understand why Boris has done that, because he’s followed the rest of the world. Except for Sweden. And you can’t really go against the rest of the world. Otherwise, you’d be absolutely pilloried if you got it wrong. But I do believe we’ve got it wrong. I do believe we’ve been doing the wrong thing. And I do believe we’re doing the wrong thing now. And we really need to understand, how deadly is this virus? And from the figures I’m seeing, the virus is not that deadly, for those six reasons. And the Government and the scientists need to understand the weighting behind those six reasons, so that we make the appropriate decisions. So, are you saying that... I mean, we’ve got a Professor of theoretical epidemiology. Are you saying you know better than Sunetra? I didn’t say that, did I? Well, Sunetra thinks it is more deadly than you’re saying. No, I’m agreeing with what she said, but you don’t have to be a Professor to read the statistics and understand the facts. You just need to have a degree of intellect. Nicci, you had your hand on your head there. I wasn’t quite sure whether that meant you approved or disapproved. I’m a bit baffled by this conversation. I mean, it seems to me that clearly, Covid—19 is deadly. Clearly, it’s deadly for people who are vulnerable, for people who have underlying health conditions, and for people who are old and for people who have dementia. I’m really unhappy at the idea that you somehow so shield that section of society that you almost build a well within the society, so there are some people who are being kind of locked up in their homes and some people who are free to go out into the world and have a nice time. It seems to me that what we have to think about is ways of dealing with the epidemic and then ways of living alongside the epidemic, and those things can be done together. So, it’s true, Ithink, that in the name of a national emergency, lots of things have been done which I find quite scary. I was mentioning earlier people being kept out of care homes where their relatives are. People not getting cancer treatment. Lots of domestic abuse going on because people are locked up in tiny little flats. So, I think we need to have a proper grown—up conversation about how to best deal with a pandemic and how to live with a pandemic so that, at the other end of it, there is notjust the most enormous legacy of unresolved grief and guilt and damage and depression. And we’re not doing either of those things at the moment. Let’s keep on this topic, but I want to take another question. Anna Wood. So, not quite two weeks into the academic year, I’m aware that local schools in Bolton are already sending whole year groups home to quarantine for two weeks due to one or perhaps two cases of Covid. Surely, given the nature of Covid, this could happen again once these children return to school after the two weeks? I was wondering if there was a less disruptive way to manage outbreaks in schools? And, Anna, you’re a primary school teacher, aren’t you? lam, yeah. So, you’ve heard Nadhim talking about what he’s intending to do with schools and what’s been done for schools so far. Is that enough? Do you think that will resolve it, as far as you’re concerned? Erm, I think that, erm... As we are at the moment, everything seems to be unsure really, because there are whole year groups going home and they’ve onlyjust come back in for a week. They’ve only had a week in and, already, they’ve been sent home for a further two weeks to quarantine. So, itjust seems like it’s a disruption again, after they’ve already had six months off school. What, it feels like a revolving door, you’re saying? Yeah, itjust keeps going on and on for us. And I just think that I’ve already seen massive gaps in the learning of the children, you know, they’ve fallen behind, and they really need to be in school. So, Sunetra, given yourview of the pandemic and an alternative way of handling it, what do you say to someone like Anna? Well, precisely. I mean, when I said the disease wasn’t deadly, what I meant, of course, was precisely that — that it’s not deadly in a very large sector of the population. So, that presents us with this workable solution, whereby we can stop testing them, let them get on with their lives, let them go to school and receive something that is incredibly valuable to them, which is education and training, let people keepjobs, let them feed their children. Let’s preserve all of these things. Let the Arts continue, or resume, and continue to flourish. We can do all this by aggressively protecting — I think maybe shielding is not the right word — aggressively protecting those who are indeed vulnerable to this infection — which, of course, I apologise, of course it can be very deadly in a certain sector of the population. The good news is, we know now who is vulnerable, to a very large degree. We know that. And we also know... What are the things we really know in this? We know who’s vulnerable and we know about the enormous costs of some of these measures. How can we balance these? We can balance these by using our tests to find creative solutions to protect the vulnerable, notjust shield them and shut them up and box them away, but ways of protecting them by testing people who they’ll be in contact with and making sure that they won’t pass the virus on to them. By creating the conditions whereby they are at a low risk of contracting this virus, which has not diminished in its potency, but is currently now held at low risk. But we cannot hold it at low risk forever, without paying these extreme costs. So... I absolutely agree with what you’re saying. I just wondered why you think, or know, that the virus is not losing its potency? Well, because it doesn’t mutate very quickly. It doesn’t change much. There is no... I mean, we don’t know anything for certain about this virus, but it hasn’t really changed in ways that would biologically suggest that it has become less virulent. But what has happened is that levels of infection have declined considerably since April, and the way people die is when those infections leak into the vulnerable sector. Yeah. So, that’s what we need to stop. Jon Ashworth, are you persuaded at all by what you’ve been hearing? No, not really. I mean, I fully respect what you’re saying, quite obviously, and I’m very aware of your background in this field. Although there are other epidemiologists who take a slightly different view to you, of course. And you are quite right that the numbers of deaths have been coming down. That is something we should celebrate. But it is a virus that spreads with speed and severity. And we also know that there are increasing numbers of people in younger age brackets who have caught the virus. And, yes, they may not have been admitted to intensive care in a hospital, but they are suffering from debilitating long—term conditions as a result of the virus. Now, obviously... But that’s true of many viruses. Sorry? But that’s true of many viruses. Well, it’s very true, but it’s not very pleasant to get it. It’s not very pleasant for the people who’ve got it. Because it’s a multi—organ virus, isn’t it? That’s also true of flu. Sorry? That’s also true of flu. Fine, let everybody get it and just... You know, that is not, if I may say so... Why would everybody get it? If I may say so, I do not believe allowing people to be exposed to a virus that we know is deadly or creates serious long—term health problems for them is the right, is the rightjudgment. Then why don’t you shut down for flu? ..is not the rightjudgment for us to make as policymakers. We are trying to protect people, to save lives and to drive down infections as best we can. But the way in which we do that is by investing properly in a decent testing and tracing system. We do not have decent testing and tracing at the moment. Which is why we’ve got hundreds of schoolchildren starting this school term in the same way they ended the last school term — at home and not in education. All right. Let... Let me just make this point, because I just think you’re on a party political broadcast. You know, you’ve listened to what I’ve said, you’ve listened to what an expert said and you’ve dismissed it completely because you want to nail the Government on Test and Trace. No, I want to save lives. And that’s not fair. I want to save lives, actually. No, you don’t want to save lives. I do actually want to save lives, John. You just want to let the virus rip through the population. No, absolutely not. We’re killing people with cancer. We’re killing young people with cancer to protect young people who won’t die of this virus. We absolutely need to protect the aged and the infirm. I’ve been saying that for six months. We have to... Whether we call it shielding or what sort of protection, we have to protect them to the nth degree and let everybody else carry on with the work, and there will be less deaths overall, I have no doubt whatsoever. But you won’t even listen to what we’re saying. I disagree. ..Because you want to push your party political broadcast... I respectfully disagree with you. No, let me finish. ..that the Conservative Party are failing miserably. Well, they have. They are failing on testing, you said that as well. Yeah, I’m not disagreeing with that, but what I don’t like is the fact that... Well, why are you criticising me when I make the same point that you make? What I don’t like is that you’re sticking to your guns, but you don’t even listen to the argument... I have listened, I disagree with you. ..that there’s a different way of dealing with this virus. I completely disagree with you. Can I make the point — lives. Notjust lives in this country, lives around the world, globally, lives. We need to save those lives. We need to make sure 160 million people don’t starve to death. That’s really important. I am following Anna’s question. I am a lecturer at college and exactly what Anna said in terms of after two weeks isolation, we could end up in the same vote. My issue is, how long are we going to play catch up? It is notjust education, it is the NHS and it is also the economy. Everything was just shut down and we are still not at full capacity, when will we ever get there? We will constantly be on that wheel, playing catch up. Peter. Hi there. This question is for Sunetra, because she is an epidemiologist and a specialist. I do kind of admire her more relaxed approach, although would she say the sort of preconditions that have perhaps facilitated the growth and creation of this virus, in terms of degradation of the environment and pollution etc, do you think that there is something in the future that could cause much more damage, if we aren’t protecting the environment as much I’m going to move around the audience as quickly as I can. Carol. I work in a pharmacy and just this week they have introduced the flu vaccination for the over 655. It has been extremely popular. People in general are so frightened ofjust becoming ill and being vulnerable. Not only to Covid, but to flu and the condition it can cause, especially for those with underlying conditions. Patients are just not getting access to the doctors. There are services we would normally take for granted. We are very lucky with the NHS. There are still a lot of loopholes where the NHS are not filling them. Six weeks for an appointment for someone who is feeling very stressed or depressed or has an underlying condition, because of something they are already suffering from, diabetes and asthma for example, heart conditions, they have just not been able to get access to normal NHS care, and if they do get the coronavirus, they feel like they are going to be lost. 0K, Tuesday. My question is, with winter approaching, what is the government’s coronavirus winter plan and how will they facilitate the NHS to cope with winter pressures and a potential second wave? Nadhim, I am going to come to you, Ijust want to hear one more, from Matt. My question was, and there are a lot of different opinions out there, but what does the panel think of Professor Whitty’s alleged comments about two—week national lockdown? There is lots of talk, Nadhim, a two—week lockdown could be coming, if we do not get the infection rate down. Is that likely? Well, we have got the rule of six now, which I think it will make a difference, as well as the local interventions with Oldham and, of course, the north—east now and Leicester and Manchester and other areas, Birmingham and Solihull in my part of the world. One in seven people are living under restrictions now. If we all do the right thing and this is where I think Tyra’s question about herd immunity, which the professor, with all respect, what I have seen in the data is a big spike in those areas. Notjust amongst the 17— Ao—year—olds, which I thinkJohn was referring to, but it is actually going further into the 50 and 55 euros. And we are beginning to see, in other countries, like Spain, the hospital admissions rise as well, so Tyra, this idea of herd immunity is wrong. The right thing to do is to make sure that we all follow, you know, hands, face, space and, of course, the rule of six, which is why we have introduced, both the police and local government have said to us, we want simplicity and straightforward message to bring the prevalence down. The prevalence of the virus has shot up, which is why we have had to take this action and I think if we do the right thing, we want to avoid another national lockdown and I would like to think that we would not be in a national lockdown again if we continue to do the right thing and I implore everybody, I am sure everyone would agree here, if we all follow the rule of hands, face, space, we will manage to make sure that the second hump does not actually happen. Let’s just move off coronavirus for a moment and take a question from Matthew Eaton. Thank you. How has the Tories’ Brexit deal gone from being "oven ready" to "a threat to our economic and political integrity"? John Caudwell. Thank you for that. I don’t think that it was first of all oven ready. How would you have described it? It was partially developed. Partially frozen? If you look at what Brussels are doing, and I call them the Brussels bully boys, they were taking £8 billion per year net off us, they were benefiting by £80 billion worth of trade benefit in trading with Britain. That is 80 billion better trade for them than we were receiving. They were then plundering our fishing waters and all that with the £8 billion. Now, any commercial minded businessmen on the planet would say, yes, we would love to do a free trade deal with Britain. We would absolutely adore it! Because we are going to gain 80 billion worth of trade deficit and yet, they are bullying us and beating us up. They beat Theresa May black and blue and they have continued trying to do it all the way through. Fortunately, Boris rose to the challenge and fought back and this behaviour by Brussels I find absolutely abhorrent. L111: But of course the reason they are doing it is is because they have got no option, because if they gave Britain an easy ride, the other European countries would see that and potentially they would be an exodus, possibly a mass exodus, possibly a complete collapse of the union and of course, that is not what Brussels wants. They will use what Bmssels wants. They will use any means, what Brussels wants. They will use any means, fair or what Brussels wants. They will use any means, fair orfoul, to protect any means, fair or foul, to protect their any means, fair orfoul, to protect their situation and make it look to any country that dares to want to come out of the union, that they will be crucified in the process. Look what they have done just recently, threatened to cut off all Britain’s food supplies to Northern Ireland. I mean, that is appalling! jon Ashworth. I Ireland. I mean, that is appalling! Jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious, jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious, isn’t it, because Jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious, isn’t it, because Boris Jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious, isn’t it, because BorisJohnson told isn’t it, because Boris johnson told us he had isn’t it, because BorisJohnson told us he had an oven ready deal, he insisted on having a general election in order to get a mandate for his deal and his deal went through Parliament and we were lucky through Partiament and we were lucky enough to see a through Parliament and we were lucky enough to see a parade of ministers on the television shows and in the on the telavision shows and in the studio is on the television shows and in the studio is telling us that Boris johnson studio is telling us that Boris Johnson had got this great deal and johnson had got this great deal and we Johnson had got this great deal and we should all celebrate, that Boris johnson had we should all celebrate, that Boris Johnson had confounded his critics, johnson had confounded his critic, as he said, Johnson had confounded his critics, as he said, because it was such a brilliant deal. Now, six months down the line, we are told that it isn’t such a brilliant deal and it has to be looked at again. Because they did not understand, apparently, the implications of the deal at time, or they are either lying to us at the time and now what they are doing is, is by bringing forward these particular measures in the way that they affect the rundown and they affect the mndown and protocol, they affect the rundown and protocol, they are actually talking about or admitting that they are prepared to break international law! That is a quite extraordinary position by the United Kingdom to be in, a country that helped create international law and has always been a proud nation on the global stage, making the case for international law and it has left us in this rather sorry state and potentially the next President of the United States criticising us last night on Twitter and I think, why are they doing all of this? Why why are they doing all of this? why are they doing why are they doing all of this? Why are they doing it at this time, in the midst of a global pandemic, we ran have the midst of a global pandemic, we can have disagreements about how we ran have disagreements about how we should can have disagreements about how we should respond to the pandemic but I think we can all admit that it is a think we ran all admit that it is a pretty big think we can all admit that it is a pretty big issue that needs undivided attention, why are they doing this now when we need to be getting on with dealing with that? A lot of this has been misunderstood about the negotiations from the first day. You do not negotiate with your hand behind your back. We should have negotiated with Brussels should have negotiated with Bmssels on a tough should have negotiated with Brussels on a tough line right from the beginning and we would have got this done. Every single factor is compelling why the EU is going to do this deal with Britain on fair terms. The only non—compelling terms. The only non-compelling factor is terms. The only non—compelling factor is the possible collapse of the EU as every country starts to think, do we really want to be part of the shambles? It is that that is because in the EU... Wisely you not because in the EU... wisely you not doing that, is it because in the EU... Wisely you not doing that, is it because the UK Government is bad at negotiating? The Conservative government were dreadful. I used to put my head in my hands in horror at the way we were negotiating in Brussels. You do were negotiating in Bmssels. You do not negotiate were negotiating in Brussels. You do not negotiate with Belize by rajoling not negotiate with Belize by cajoling them and saying, please, rajoling them and saying, please, and ran you cajoling them and saying, please, and can you do this? You fight and ran you do this? You fight bullies and can you do this? You fight bullies with the only weapon they understand and that is force and that is what Boris has done. Now they should be doing a deal with us and saying, yes, you can have your international fishery waters back, what did they say? They said you can what did they say? They said you ran have your water what did they say? They said you can have your water is back, but you will never export another piece of fish to the whole of Europe if you fish to the whola of Europe if you do. It is fish to the whole of Europe if you do. It is disgusting. I am sure if Michel Barnier was here and if you’re watching, you can come on the you’re watching, you ran come on the programme, I you’re watching, you ran come on the programme, lam you’re watching, you can come on the programme, lam sure you’re watching, you can come on the programme, I am sure that they would deny they were acting as bully boys. Let us hear from deny they were acting as bully boys. Let us hearfrom our audience. Let us hear from our audience. Nathan. Let us hearfrom our audience. Nathan. Yes. If Let us hearfrom our audience. Nathan. Yes. IfI Let us hearfrom our audience. Nathan. Yes. If I may ask, based on Nathan. Yes. IfI may ask, based on the government Nathan. Yes. If I may ask, based on the government admitting that they are willing to break international law, why should they expect the rest of us to follow the laws that they said via Twitter, for instance, if I do not wear a face mask on the train, is that do not wear a face mask on the train, is thatjust a specific and train, is that just a specific and limited way train, is thatjust a specific and limited way of breaking the law and therefore it is OK by the government? Nile. I therefore it is OK by the government? Nile. Iwanted therefore it is OK by the government? Nile. I wanted to government? Nila. Iwanted to clarify why government? Nile. I wanted to clarify why Boris was seen as fighting back in Brussels when instead he is now implementing something which would involve breaking international law is to bypass the agreement, because that does not seem like he is winning if he is having to fall back to something that affects us breaking the law. None of us here can the law. None of us here ran condone... the law. None of us here can condone... Let me hear the law. None of us here can condone... Let me hearfrom the condone... Let me hear from the audience. It condone... Let me hearfrom the audience. It is Question Time. Michael. I think it is a bit rich from john Michael. I think it is a bit rich from John Caldwell beating the party from john Caldwell beating the party political from John Caldwell beating the party politicaljohn when he is doing a political john when he is doing a great job of politicaljohn when he is doing a greatjob of doing that. Basically great job of doing that. Basically what is greatjob of doing that. Basically what is quite clear is that the government, it is apparent for a no deal exit what it takes and blaming and bullying as deal exit what it takes and blaming and bullying asJohn appears to be and bullying as john appears to be doing and and bullying asJohn appears to be doing and insulting Brussels isn’t doing and insulting Bmssels isn’t really going doing and insulting Brussels isn’t really going to work, I do not think, it is not working at the moment, is it? Does anyone support but the government is doing? Katie. You’re taking down your hand. 0K, Katie, let us hear You’re taking down your hand. 0K, Katie, let us hearfrom You’re taking down your hand. 0K, Katie, let us hear from you. You’re taking down your hand. 0K, Katie, let us hearfrom you. I do Katie, let us hear from you. I do not support Katie, let us hearfrom you. I do not support them. There are plenty of Brexiteers among you. Ian, let us hear from you. I of Brexiteers among you. Ian, let us hearfrom you. I think it is more of hear from you. I think it is more of an oven ready hearfrom you. I think it is more of an oven ready chicken stir—fry. I an oven ready chicken stir-fry. I cannot see an oven ready chicken stir—fry. I cannot see the way the economy is rannot see the way the economy is going at the cannot see the way the economy is going at the moment, if we have a no deal, I going at the moment, if we have a no deal, Irannot going at the moment, if we have a no deal, I cannot see it being much worse than it is now or what is to come. 0K. Boris worse than it is now or what is to come. 0K. BorisJohnson’s deal, the come. 0K. Borisjohnson’s deal, the question is, from come. 0K. BorisJohnson’s deal, the question is, from Matt, how has the Brexit deal gone from being oven ready to a threat to our economic and political integrity? I want to and political integrity? Iwantto read and political integrity? I want to read something to you, this is a huge success for Boris, I pay tribute to all his hard work and congratulate him for defying the odds, this is a description of the withdrawal agreement agreed by Boris johnson. He withdrawal agreement agreed by Boris Johnson. He said that? Nay. I know. johnson. He said that? May. I know. How has gone a Johnson. He said that? Nay. I know. How has gone a huge success to no longer a success at all? Matt, we left the European Union with the withdrawal agreement and the Northern Irish protocol, within that, especially on the Northern Ireland Protocol, the eyes were not dotted and the teas were not crossed on both sides agreed that there would be a Joint Committee to deal would be a joint Committee to deal with the would be a Joint Committee to deal with the details of that. Where we with the details of that. where we are today, we with the details of that. Where we are today, we are negotiating the future arrangement between ourselves and the EU and we have deliberately not asked for a bespoke special unit deal because the moment you asked for something that has never been written down before, the lawyers have a field written down before, the lawyers have afield day and it will take have a field day and it will take forever have afield day and it will take forever to deliver. Lots of lawyers are resigning. Let me finish this point. We have asked for a day like Canada, something the EU have done before, like with Japan, from the before, like with japan, from the European before, like with Japan, from the European Union. We are negotiating in good faith, it is not about us actually not delivering on the withdrawal agreement and the Northern Irish protocol, it is about how we deliver on those things. We are investing in infrastructure, you are investing in infrastmclure, you have all are investing in infrastructure, you have all heard this week about the point john have all heard this week about the pointJohn was making about food, we point john was making about food, we are investing in pointJohn was making about food, we are investing in infrastructure in Northern Ireland and the Northern Ireland Secretary is putting £2 billion to get Stormont back operational because we needed to do that because of our commitment to the withdrawal agreement. No, no, Nadhim, that is off the point. How has it gone from being a deal that you thought was a huge SUCCESS... I’m about to tell you. ..that you went to the country with, to one that you now want to change? No, I’m confident that we will get a deal. We’re negotiating in good faith. Monsieur Barnier is also negotiating in good faith. And I think both sides can get a deal. 0K. What the Prime Minister has said is, we can’t keep negotiating forever. There are still significant gaps on fishing and on what they call level playing field — ie, state subsidy. Now, we’vejust announced a deal with Japan, a really historic deal, much bigger deal than we would have had with Japan if we were still part of the EU. And there, again, we have announced how we will deal with state subsidy, which should reassure our European friends as well. So, I’m confident that we will get a deal on the future if both sides negotiate hard by October the 15th. Beyond which, the Prime Minister is right to say that businesses around the country — and I’m the Business and Industry Minister — need certainty. So, we need to make sure that if we can’t get a deal on the terms of Canada, we’ll go for an Australia deal and we will support our businesses... Which is no—deal. An Australia deal means no—deal. Australia are on WTO terms. Yes, which is no—deal. It trades with the European Union. I just wondered if you want to answer Nathan’s point about... Because we’ve heard the Northern Ireland Secretary saying not once, but twice — and he should know because it’s about the Northern Ireland Protocol... Yeah. ..that this is breaking the law in a very specific and limited way. Would you, as Nathan is suggesting, sanction other law breaking in a very specific and limited way — say about the rule of six, for example? Well, the Withdrawal Agreement does not, and the UK Internal Market Bill does not do that. The clauses within it... Hang on. You’re saying it doesn’t break the law? No, hold on a second. The Attorney General has written to the committee, the Select Committees responsible, making it very clear what the legal position is. No, hang on. So, just so we’re clear. Yes. The Northern Ireland Secretary says it breaks the law. Are you saying differently? No, I’m not saying differently. I’m saying to you exactly what the Attorney General has written to the Select Committees. And the Northern Ireland Secretary has said. What I’m saying is that no government can stand by and watch a part of its country and a community within its country, Northern Ireland, be harmed in any way. That’s not what I’m saying in this question. These clauses, Nathan, are an insurance policy. We’ve added to them that Parliament has to vote. Parliament is sovereign. Parliament have to vote if the Government has to invoke them to protect the peace process and the communities of Northern Ireland. Because what we can’t do, toJohn Caudwell’s point, is have a situation where an extreme interpretation of the Northern Irish protocol would actually stop us from sending food... 65% of our trade with Northern Ireland is with GB. 0K. That’s actually not what Nathan was asking, so let me just hear a bit more from... That’s not what Nathan’s question... The peace process... But that wasn’t his question! Yes, I... I know you want to talk, but that wasn’t his question! I’m answering his question. No, his question was, very specifically, given that the Government is breaking the law in a specific and limited way, is it OK for everyone else? I’m saying, Nathan, you can’t extrapolate in that way because you can’t watch a part of your country he harmed and the peace process be harmed and be a bystander. 0K, we hearyou. The reason for these clauses are they’re an insurance policy. Charlotte, let’s hear from you. Yeah, so the panel are talking about breaking the law. If these negotiations don’t go well, it’ll be the case that UK law enforcement loses access to really crucial European crime systems. This is a real concern for everybody in the law enforcement community. I don’t know what the panel think about that, but the way the negotiations are deteriorating, this is looking more and more likely. The workarounds are really not efficient. Zainab, you had your hand up a moment ago. Hi. Yeah, I just want to follow on from Nathan’s question. Is it not hypocritical that the Government is advising the nation to report their neighbour for breaking the law, however, the Government themselves intend to breach the rule of law? 0K. Nicci... I’ll come back to you, John. Nicci, you’re smiling at that. I am smiling at that, and at the previous question about lawbreaking. I mean, the rule of six is quite interesting because the rule of six feels like it’s clear, and then you know that people are going to pubs, going to restaurants. They’re stomping around on moors, dressed in britches, shooting grouse. Well, Nicci, let’s come back to Matthew’s question, though, which was about... Well, let’s come back to Matthew’s question, which is about, "How has the Tories’ Brexit deal gone from being oven—ready to a threat to our economic and political integrity?" Those are Matt’s words. My view on that is that I ardently wanted to remain in Europe, and I think I’ll be sad until the day I die that we’re leaving. But I’ve completely accepted that 52% of the country voted to leave. But 52% of the country did not vote to leave in a kind of chaotic, disastrous way that’s also driving the country mad with boredom, I think. We seem to be locked into this terrifyingly pedantic conversation about minutiae — which is very important, but it makes most of us lose the will to live, I’d say. Can I come back on that? 0K, let me bring Sunetra in, she’s not talked about it. I will let you come back in. Sunetra. What are my views? Are you losing the will to live? Well, I’m just thinking that here are two shambles. There’s the way this pandemic has been dealt with and there’s the way Brexit is being, is unfolding. And in both cases, I’m worried about the economically vulnerable. I think in both cases, we need to identify... I agree, I don’t want to... In many cases, in this case, I don’t have the qualifications to dwell on the niceties. What I want to see is that we identify the vulnerable and protect them. And I think that should be ourfundamental goal. And that is where we should invest. Jon, you’re dying to come in. Yeah, I really think the points that Nathan and Zainab have made, they really are quite important. And I know, you know, I have sympathy for you as a Minister because you may find them slightly frustrating questions, but... the actions of governments and the actions of ministers have consequences. And we’re in the midst of a crisis. We’re asking the British people to make immense sacrifices — the rule of six, in Oldham, in Leicester, now in Newcastle and Sunderland, not going into other people’s houses, not seeing your family members in private gardens. I think the sacrifices, I think these restrictions are warranted. Probably disagree with colleagues here, but I agree with the Government that these restrictions are necessary to try and bring infections down. I think we also need to sort out test and tracing. Sorry for being party political, but it is a shambles and needs fixing. But at the same time, you’re asking people to follow the law — face masks, rule of six, not going into other houses — and you’re actually completely admitting that you’re going to be breaking international law. So, do you not appreciate that when we’re in a pandemic and we’re asking people to follow so many different restrictions and rules, that the very least the Government should do is follow the law themselves? Can I come back on this point to Zainab and Nathan? Zainab, Parliament will make that decision. Parliament is sovereign. Why do I say that to you? Because actually, the German Parliament, at times, has actually taken votes that move away from international agreements within Europe because they deem it unconstitutional to their country. The Canadian Parliament has actually voted on things where they’ve signed international treaties, but they’ve moved away from it in domestic lawmaking. So, the same thing will happen here in our Parliament. We’re not saying this will happen. All we’re doing is saying we need the safeguards, an insurance policy, that we can’t allow one part of the United Kingdom — Northern Ireland, the communities of Northern Ireland — to be harmed in any way by some extreme interpretation of the Northern Irish Protocol. We will bring it back to Parliament, to trigger those clauses — if we need to — to protect the unfettered access of Northern Ireland to Great Britain. That is already, by the way, respected in the Withdrawal Agreement. So, this has precedent internationally. And I think it would be wrong and unfair to extrapolate that to breaking the rule of six or to breaking any other rules in our country. So, that is all I would say to you, Zainab and Nathan. 0K. Peter. Yeah, I don’t condone breaking international law, although states do it quite often. I think a really dangerous thing in the future, being a Brexiteer, is that due to trade deals — say, the one with Japan, which I think is really impressive, I think it’s great — in the future, will states be looking to make deals with us, in case they’re worried we might renege on it or pull back? And I’m saying this as a Brexiteer. I just don’t think it’s great going forward, that states might think, well, they had an agreement here, they might go back with us. That may sort of harm future relations worldwide. I don’t know what everyone thinks about that, but I think it’s quite an interesting view for the future. But, Peter, people can see that we are doing it in the extreme case that the interpretation harms Northern Ireland. 0K. Nadhim, you have said that. Ijust need to hear from the audience. You have said that repeatedly. Japan agreed a deal with us because they see the benefits of a deal with the United Kingdom, which I think you were referring to earlier. Katie. 50, Northern towns like Oldham are already disproportionately affected by coronavirus, and I think we’re also going to be disproportionately affected by a no—deal Brexit. We were on holiday in Copenhagen last year and we were talking to people there and they said, look, we never have a majority government. Anytime anyone wants to form a government here, people need to sit down and they need to negotiate each other. And they were absolutely flabbergasted that our UK Government doesn’t seem to understand what negotiation is. It’s not standing there and shouting at the foreigners, you know? You need to sit round the table and negotiate properly. Otherwise, do you know who’s going to lose? It’s not going to be London, it’s going to be Northern towns like Oldham. And, Matt, you asked the question. Erm, yeah, sorry. It was just to go back to the point of, yeah, it said it was oven—ready, but Nadhim said that Is needed to be dotted and Ts crossed. So, it was never oven—ready. When the UK came out of the shared customs territories, it was always going to be that Northern Ireland was going to be different. It is part of the UK, but it’s the only part of the UK with a [and border. So, we knew that this was going to happen. So, it was just another example of the Government spinning and basicallyjust lying to us again. 0K. There’s more of you have got your hands up and I’d love to come to you, but I’m afraid our time is up. Thank you, all our questioners from the Oldham area tonight. It was great to hear from you. Next week, we’ll have a virtual audience again, of course, and we will be coming from Chingford. In and around Chingford. And on the panel, we’ll bejoined by comedian Shappi Khorsandi, and the newly—elected leader of the Liberal Democrats. So, do get in touch with us if you’d like to be part of our virtual audience. We’d love to hear from you. You’re a key part of the programme, so do get in touch. And you can do that at the Question Time website. There’s an online form and you can fill it in. And then Adrian Chiles, as always, is coming up on Radio 5 Live with Question Time Extra Time. You can see on the screen how to get in touch by phone, by text or by tweet. But for now, thank you very much to my panel for coming in. Our first show after the summer. Great to get started. Thank you all very much for coming on. And Nicci, of course, forjoining us from Suffolk, I think. So, thank you forjoining us down the line. And of course, thank you to you at home for watching. From Question Time, bye—bye. APPLAUSE