Good evening and welcome to question time. On tonight’s panel, Robert On tonight’s panel, RobertJenrick, On tonight’s panel, Robert jenrick, the On tonight’s panel, RobertJenrick, the government Secretary of State for communities, housing and local for communities, housing and [oral government. A for communities, housing and local government. A member of Labour’s front bench since 2011, Emily Thornberry. Humphrey Cobbold, chief executive of PureGym, the company’s executive of PureGym, the companrs largest chain of executive of PureGym, the company’s largest chain of gyms. And Richard Horton, deputy editor in chief of the Lancet. We were all Horton, deputy editor in chief of the Lancet. We were alljust the lancet. We were all just watching the Lancet. We were alljust watching that round of applause and in our little studio we want to give a clap, don’t we? For the health and rare a clap, don’t we? For the health and care workers. That is our little rare workers. That is our little tribute. care workers. That is our little tribute. Thank you very much indeed. I want to say for anybody who was watching last week, here we are again with no audience for good reasons in these very strange and frightening time is back for all of us. We have four panellists in order to have suitable social distancing. We were going to be in Shrewsbury this week, but we can’t be there, but we have asked the people of Shrewsbury to send in questions to ask, so we will be seeing them this evening. But we are also live, so if you would like to put any questions to the panel, contact us in the usual way. I will read as many of those as we can. Our first question those as we ran. Our first question this evening is those as we can. Our first question this evening is from Mark Harrison, a plumber from this evening is from Mark Harrison, 3 plumberfrom Shrewsbury. As a a plumberfrom Shrewsbury. As a self—employed tradesmen I was self-employed tradesman I was awaiting self—employed tradesmen I was awaiting the Chancellor’s speech to unveil his support package. After listening to what he had to say I feel frustrated and angry. I am one feel fmstrated and angry. I am one of those feel frustrated and angry. I am one of those self—employed people who of those self-employed peopla who has of those self—employed people who has less than 12 months’ books and has lass than 12 months’ books and in his words, has less than 12 months’ books and in his words, he stated, we cannot help you. The Universal Credit option will not help me cover my rent, pay my bills, put food on the table. rent, pay my bills, put food on the tabla. We rent, pay my bills, put food on the table. We do not know how long this tabla. We do not know how long this is going to last table. We do not know how long this is going to last or how long I will be unemployed for. Why couldn’t be unemployed for. why couldn’t nothing he be unemployed for. Why couldn’t nothing he put in place to help support us using our bank accounts, and invoices. Or support us using our bank accounts, and invoices. Orare you support us using our bank accounts, and invoices. Or are you TR. support us using our bank accounts, and invoices. Orare you TR. Unique and invoices. Or are you TR. Unique tax and invoices. Orare you TR. Unique tax reference. Rishi Sunak said today he would not leave anyone behind. First of all, can I say, behind. First of all, ran I say, along with the behind. First of all, can I say, along with the millions across the country, thank you to the NHS. They are doing an heroic country, thank you to the NHS. They are doing an heroicjob and deserve are doing an heroic job and deserve all of our are doing an heroicjob and deserve all of our support in the days and weeks ahead. But this crisis is having an impact beyond public health and it is putting a lot of peopla into health and it is putting a lot of people into difficult situations, peopla into difficult situations, like people into difficult situations, like the gentleman we have just heard from, who are concerned about their livelihoods. We made a promise that we would do everything it takes to support them. We have put in place an unprecedented package of measures to support the economy and we did that in the budget and we did it a week later we did that in the budget and we did it a week laterfor we did that in the budget and we did it a week later for businesses and individuals. The Chancellor tonight has said what we are going to do for the self—employed and he has made a the self-employed and he has made a big the self—employed and he has made a big commitment, which is for the vast majority of self—employed vast majority of self-employed peopla, vast majority of self—employed people, round about 95%, we will peopla, round about 9596, we will offer to pay people, round about 95%, we will offer to pay 80% of their earnings, offer to pay 8096 of their earnings, looking back offer to pay 80% of their earnings, looking back over the last three 79575- “P looking back over the last three years, up to £2500 every month, up to earnings of £50,000. Only those earning more than £50,000 will not be eligibla for earning more than £50,000 will not be eligible for the scheme. It is very difficult from an administrative... It is not people administrative... It is not peopla earning administrative... It is not people earning £50,000 and above. He is self employed and he has not got accounts for a year or more and has been left high and dry. The scheme will apply to a 95% of those self—employed and those earning over self-employed and those earning over £50,000 self—employed and those earning over £50,000 will not be eligible to stop £50,000 will not be eligibla to stop we are asking £50,000 will not be eligible to stop we are asking people to provide three years’ worth of earnings. We have said, however, we will look at what ever you have got. It is easier to operate the scheme if you come to us with three years’ earnings. That is the commitment we made today. But if you do not have that, we will do whatever we can to support you. I whatever we ran to support you. I would urge whatever we can to support you. I would urge people in that situation would urge peopla in that situation to give us would urge people in that situation to give us what they have got and we will work through it with HMRC to see if there is a way to support you. This is a difficult scheme to implement. People who are self—employed will appreciate that. self-employed will appreciate that. It is self—employed will appreciate that. It is much harder self—employed will appreciate that. It is much harderfrom an It is much harder from an operational It is much harderfrom an operational perspective, than to create a scheme for employees where you ran easily create a scheme for employees where you can easily see what they are you ran easily see what they are earning, and you can easily see what they are earning, and we can see the link earning, and we ran see the link between earning, and we can see the link between them and their employer. Here we have to design a scheme that is deliverable. It would be wrong to raise false hope and pretend this is simple. The Chancellor has designed a scheme that can help get that a scheme that ran help get that money to a scheme that can help get that money to those people. If you do not money to those peopla. If you do not have money to those people. If you do not have those records, still give us what you have got. Even if you do not have a year’s accounts, you can not have a year’s accounts, you ran still go to the not have a year’s accounts, you can still go to the government to see if you are eligible? Yes, we cannot promise, but we will see what we can promise, but we will see what we ran give them with promise, but we will see what we can give them with what they have got to see if it can apply to them. Emily? see if it ran apply to them. Emily? I am not see if it can apply to them. Emily? I am not pretending this is not difficult. It is important to acknowledge the assistance the government has given and they have done a great deal and it has been very radical. However, self—employed very radical. However, self-employed people are in a very radical. However, self—employed people are in a great variety of peopla are in a great variety of jobs and it is a people are in a great variety of jobs and it is a difficult scheme to get up and running. What the get up and mnning. what the government get up and running. What the government has been tempted to do, and I understand why, is to do a nice, neat headline, worked for three years, you will get 80% up to three years, you will get 8096 up to 2500. three years, you will get 80% up to 2500. But self—employed people fit 2500. But self-employed peopla fit into many 2500. But self—employed people fit into many different categories. There are a number of problems that are immediately obvious. The first is they will not get any money until june, so there is they will not get any money until June, so there will be a lot of self—employed people who will not self-employed peopla who will not have self—employed people who will not have had money since February. We have a tweet from Katie Rose Bennett, 3 have a tweet from Katie Rose Bennett, a singer songwriter. Is March the 26 and the beginning of june is a long March the 26 and the beginning of June is a long time away for all the self—employed people I know. What do self-employed peopla I know. what do you expect us self—employed people I know. What do you expect us to eat? Exactly, that is part of the problem. Mark in particular, a self—employed plumber, particular, a self-employed plumber, he works particular, a self—employed plumber, he works in construction, and there he works in constmction, and there is a question he works in construction, and there is a question about whether or not he is supposed to be working. Is he an essential worker or we have seen people up and down the country, there is one in my constituency where people are building luxury where peopla are building luxury ﬂats. where people are building luxury flats. We where peopla are building luxury ﬂats. We get where people are building luxury flats. We get a number of different ﬂats. We get a number of different problems flats. We get a number of different problems colliding in this. Whilst problams colliding in this. whilst the problems colliding in this. Whilst the government comes out with headlines, saying we will not leave anyone behind, the nitty—gritty is anyone behind, the nitty-gritty is quite often anyone behind, the nitty—gritty is quite often that life is more complicated and they need to keep coming back with adjustments and I just hope that they listen to the opposition when we do raise some of these problems and they do work with us in order to be able to sort it out. There are a variety of things that have not been sorted out. Mark will now need to perhaps apply for Universal Credit. But if he applies for it, he does not get any money for the first five weeks, that is part of the system. Those who are applying, I had a constituent tweak me a photograph of where he was on the waiting list when he was ringing “P the waiting list when he was ringing up and he had 99,000 people in front up and he had 99,000 peopla in front of him, and he up and he had 99,000 people in front of him, and he was going to have to wait for hours to speak to anybody to even apply to go on to Universal Credit. This is the reality of people’s lives. I am not pretending people’s lives. lam not pretending it is not hard, people’s lives. I am not pretending it is not hard, but I am saying that more needs to be done and the government needs to go further. When government needs to go further. when you think about government needs to go further. When you think about the people who work you think about the peopla who work in your gym, a you think about the people who work in your gym, 3 lot of the trainers in your gym, a lot of the trainers are in your gym, 3 lot of the trainers are self—employed, what has happened are self-employed, what has happened with you in are self—employed, what has happened with you in terms of your staff? This topic is very important to us and I was pleased to see the steps the Chancellor made this evening in terms of putting together a package for self—employed people. But terms of putting together a package for self—employed people. Butl for self-employed peopla. Butl would for self—employed people. Butl would echo some of the views Emily Reyes, that it is a complex situation. The average tenure of our trainers is typically about eight or nine months. Many of them will not have had the trading history. Many of them are recently qualified and new to the game of being self—employed, so they might not be self-employed, so they might not be familiar self—employed, so they might not be familiar with many of the features required. Certainly they will have been watching this very carefully, we are talking about nearly 3000 we are talking about hearty 3000 peopla in we are talking about nearly 3000 people in our business, so a substantial number. They are typirallv substantial number. They are typically young, very concerned about their future. Our business typically young, very concerned about theirfuture. Our business had about their future. Our business had to dose about theirfuture. Our business had to close down on Friday night after the Prime Minister asked us to. The whole business closed down within whola business closed down within ten whole business closed down within ten hours. A business that took us ten years to build closed down ten hours. I have tremendous respect for my colleagues all across our business. Other businesses are business. other businesses are experiencing business. Other businesses are experiencing same and we closed down with goodwill because we knew it would have to happen. We have had peopla dose would have to happen. We have had people close down their place of peopla close down their place of work people close down their place of work and peopla close down their place of work and put people close down their place of work and put themselves into 1009an work and put themselves into jeopardy for the future and it is a very challenging thing for them to very challanging thing for them to have very challenging thing for them to have done. We will be supporting them and helping them with the interpretation of the package that the Chancellor has put together. I am glad to hear the Chancellor has put together. I am glad to hearfrom Robert that am glad to hear from Robert that there am glad to hearfrom Robert that there will be attention paid to people who might not have had the perfect trading history, to help them understand what might be done for them. We will be playing our part as much as we can, we are part as much as we ran, we are absolutely part as much as we can, we are absolutely committed to try to help them in every way that we can as them in every way that we ran as part of our them in every way that we can as part of our overall ecosystem as a business. Richard, it is so important that people feel they can important that peopla feel they ran afford important that people feel they can afford to be off work if at all afford to be offer ifatall possibla in afford to be off work if at all possible in order afford to be off work if at all possible in orderfor the maximum possible in order for the maximum number possible in orderfor the maximum number of us to stay at home? One of the lessons of this epidemic is the connectedness we all feel to one another. My health depends upon your health, your health depends upon my health. We share that comment worth in our society. Maybe when we have got through this whole period that got through this whola period that is one got through this whole period that is one of the lessons that will come is one of the lassons that will come out of this, is one of the lessons that will come out of this, that we understand the collective dose of society, and we collactive dose of society, and we will all collective dose of society, and we will all have to invest more in our society, in social protection for our society, in the NHS, society, in social protection for oursociety, in the NHS, in society, in social protection for our society, in the NHS, in an education system, to give us that security. Not the national security in the conventional way we think about it, but the human Security that we need to protect ourselves from some of the shocks all around us. Maybe that is one of the benefits that we will see from this, that interdependence every single human being has in this country and across the planet. This is what Beverly Smith had to This is what Beverty Smith had to say. Good This is what Beverly Smith had to say. Good evening, I am from Shrewsbury, I am say. Good evening, I am from Shrewsbury, lam Beverley. I say. Good evening, I am from Shrewsbury, lam Beverley. Ifind myself in an unfortunate position at the moment. I have recently myself in an unfortunate position at the moment. I have recentlyjust the moment. I have recently just lost my job in the moment. I have recentlyjust lost myjob in the travel industry. lost my job in the travel industry. I was let go, we lost myjob in the travel industry. I was let go, we had flooding in the I was let go, we had ﬂooding in the town and I was let go, we had flooding in the town and also now COVID—19. I do town and also now COVID-19. I do have town and also now COVID—19. I do have underlying health conditions, have undertying health conditions, so I am have underlying health conditions, so I am now actually self isolating. I am unable to work for probably I am unabla to work for probably looks I am unable to work for probably looks like 12 weeks. Had looks like 12 weeks. Had stayed on, the company would have been able to pay 8096 of my the company would have been able to pay 80% of my wages, however this is pay 8096 of my wages, however this is not the pay 80% of my wages, however this is not the case and now I find myself not the use and now I find myself on not the case and now I find myself on Universal Credit and unable to on Universal Credit and unabla to pay anything. on Universal Credit and unable to pay anything. My question really is, how or what help is out there for me so I ran get how or what help is out there for me so I can get through this really uncertain time and lessen my anxieties, basically? Following on from what Beverley said, let me read from what Beverlay said, let me read you some more. from what Beverley said, let me read you some more. Joe says, what about you some more. joe says, what about sunplv you some more. Joe says, what about supply teachers? We work for agencies and do not fit in any box, we need help now. Claire Holmes, I am a self—employed travel agent and am a self-employed travel agent and started my am a self—employed travel agent and started my business in November after 25 years being employed. I have lost every penny I have made and now I have no support from the government. Another supply teacher talking here. As everyone is saying, Robert, no one is claiming this is simpla, far Robert, no one is claiming this is simple, farfrom it, but as Rishi simpla, far from it, but as Rishi Sunak said, simple, farfrom it, but as Rishi Sunak said, people will have to wait Sunak said, peopla will have to wait until at Sunak said, people will have to wait until at least Sunak said, people will have to wait until at leastJune, they will not until at leastjune, they will not have any until at leastJune, they will not have any money coming in before then. If they apply for Universal Credit, we are talking about £73 a week after five weeks. Matt Hancock said he could not live on that. Is there not a simpler way? I am thinking perhaps in Ireland, everyone who has lost their thinking perhaps in Ireland, everyone who has lost theirjob, be they employed or self—employed, has they employed or self-employed, has been given they employed or self—employed, has been given 350 euros a week, just straightforward and simple. Would that not cut through this? For the self—employed we are taking For the self-employed we are taking steps beyond For the self—employed we are taking steps beyond what the Chancellor announced today. I would like the scheme to be able to support people sooner but we need to make this a deliverable scheme that is actually going to work and the experts at HMRC think that is unfortunately the amount of time it takes to get the scheme operational. We don’t want to raise false hopes, we need to give people certainty about when they can people certainty about when they ran expect money people certainty about when they can expect money in their bank accounts. You say the Chancellor will do other things so what are they? The other steps we have ta ken things so what are they? The other steps we have taken for example, enabling people to access employment support from day one. Removing the minimum income floor support from day one. Removing the minimum income ﬂoorfrom Universal minimum income ﬂoor from Universal Credit. We minimum income ﬂoorfrom Universal Credit. We have put more money generally into the benefit system for the benefit of everyone, around £7 billion extra. We have made some particular benefits that will be important to people, like Beverley important to peopla, like Beverlay you important to peopla, like Bevertay you just heard important to people, like Beverley you just heard from, more generous, like housing benefit and the local like housing benefit and the [oral housing like housing benefit and the local housing allowance that will help you remain in your home and can in some remain in your home and ran in some parts of the remain in your home and can in some parts of the country he a significant sum of money. For mortgage holders and renters we have also managed to agree firstly with the mortgage companies, the lenders, a mortgage holiday of at least three months so you don’t need to be worried about that, at least for the first few months, and we will obviously extend that by agreement if the coronavirus crisis continues in three months’ time. And for renters, we have also agreed with the Court service a complete moratorium on evictions so nobody, quite rightly... For three months. Again, I have taken powers in the emergency legislation that has gone through Parliament that gives me the through Partiament that gives me the ability as through Parliament that gives me the ability as Secretary of State to increase that to six months if needed. That gives people some certainty at least that there is absolutely no reason they should lose their home as a result. I know this is very imperfect, and none of us would want to make statements like that, but we are trying to use all the levers available to us as government to give people the greatest degree of security possible in the circumstances. Can I pick up in the circumstances. (“an I pick up on a couple of in the circumstances. Can I pick up on a couple of points from that? The first thing is, those people renting accommodation, and let say they are sharing a ﬂat and one of them accommodation, and let say they are sharing a flat and one of them might sharing a ﬂat and one of them might be self—employed or might be in be self-employed or might be in insecure be self—employed or might be in insecure work. And a gang of kids now renting a place can’t meet the rent. All right, they can’t get evicted for three months but the truth is it usually takes two months to evict people anyway, so actually to evict peopla anyway, so actually they only to evict people anyway, so actually they only get one month and I don’t think that is sufficient and I don’t think it gives people security at a think it gives peopla security at a time think it gives people security at a time like this. I do think if you have powers to do it then do it and make sure no one is evicted for six months. Let’s do that now and I think it be sorted out. There’s a couple of other points you raised. Brieﬂy couple of other points you raised. Briefly please because we have a lot Brieﬂy please because we have a lot of questions. Briefly please because we have a lot of questions. There are many other EWUPS- of questions. There are many other groups, like many on zero—hours groups, like many on zero-hours contracts, or groups, like many on zero—hours contracts, or carers providing social care. This is also in your social rare. This is also in your brief. People social care. This is also in your brief. People on zero—hour contracts brief. People on zero-hour contracts don’t get brief. People on zero—hour contracts don’t get sickness benefit if they are off sick but they are the ones looking after the most sick, the most vulnerable, the elderly and most vulnerabla, the elderty and going house most vulnerable, the elderly and going house to house to look after them. If they get sick themselves they don’t get any benefit, that must be wrong. Nothing is done for those on zero—hours contracts and those on zero-hours contracts and the those on zero—hours contracts and the government really must look at that as well. Are you going to be looking at that? We have taken steps, including the things I have described to help self—employed described to help self-employed peopla. described to help self—employed people. And zero—hours contracts? peopla. And zero-hours contracts? These things people. And zero—hours contracts? These things apply to those individuals. The benefit system is the most effective way of getting money to people quickly to ensure those people can get... So I can be those peopla ran get... So I ran be clear... On those people can get... 50 I can be clear... On the renters. There is a dear... On the renters. There is a complete clear... On the renters. There is a complete moratorium on evictions which has never happened before. It didn’t happen in 2008 under the last labour didn’t happen in 2008 under the last Labour government. This is an labour government. This is an unusual step Labour government. This is an unusual step we have taken and we have the powers to extend that to six months. To be clear on zero—hour six months. To be clear on zero-hour contracts and six months. To be clear on zero—hour contracts and those on social care, contracts and those on social rare, for a contracts and those on social care, for a zero—hour contract worker who for a zero-hour contract worker who is not able for a zero—hour contract worker who is not able to work do they get Universal Credit? Universal Credit will be more generous and they can will be more generous and they ran access it will be more generous and they can access it immediately because they ran get a loan access it immediately because they can get a loan under the Universal ran get a loan under the Universal Credit system. can get a loan under the Universal Credit system. You can get a loan on Credit system. You ran get a loan on future Credit system. You can get a loan on future benefits and apply for Universal Credit even though they are not actually available for work because they are sick? They can get because they are sick? They ran get access to because they are sick? They can get access to money immediately, that’s the most important point. We have another point from Adam Booth, 3 GP another point from Adam Booth, a GP in Shrewsbury. another point from Adam Booth, 3 GP in Shrewsbury. Good evening. I am a [oral GP in Shrewsbury. Good evening. I am a local GP and unfortunately I have [oral GP and unfortunately I have had to local GP and unfortunately I have had to self—isolate for the past had to self-isolate for the past week had to self—isolate for the past week and a half. I have not been able to get remote access to be able to work from home, there has been no testing for NHS staff and my colleagues on the front line have had to go and buy their own scrubs and eye equipment from DIY stores because the personal protective equipment has not been adequate. I would have thought that these were problems that could be anticipated problams that could be anticipated and problems that could be anticipated and dealt with in advance. I would like to know what specific problems like to know what specific problams peopla like to know what specific problems people expect the NHS to have in the next few weeks and months and what they think ran next few weeks and months and what they think can be done in advance to they think ran be done in advance to sort them they think can be done in advance to sort them out. Richard, there are two aspects to this. First, how have we got to this point and was enough done to stop it, and is there anything coming down the track we need to prepare for now? First of all, I receive 20 or 30 messages a day from front line NHS workers across the country telling stories "TY across the country telling stories very similar to what Adam was just telling us. Honestly, I’m sorry to 55V telling us. Honestly, I’m sorry to say this, it is a national scandal. We shouldn’t be in this position. We knew in the last week of January knew in the last week of january that knew in the last week of January that this was coming. The message from China was absolutely clear, that a new virus with pandemic potential was hitting cities, people were being admitted to hospital, admitted to intensive care units and admitted to intensive rare units and dying, and the admitted to intensive care units and dying, and the mortality was growing. We knew that 11 weeks ago and then we wasted February when we could have acted. Time when we could have amped up testing, time when we could have got personal protective equipment ready and disseminated and we didn’t do it. I am hearing that not just a we didn’t do it. I am hearing that notjust a personal protective not just a personal protective equipment notjust a personal protective equipment is not available, it is the wrong kind of personal protective equipment. What we have protective equipment. what we have is not protective equipment. What we have is not even WHO standard. We are putting our health workers, who we have just all applauded putting our health workers, who we havejust all applauded here, in putting our health workers, who we have just all applauded here, in the front lines without the armour they need to defend themselves. They are wearing surgical masks which are not WHO standard, they wear thin plastic aprons which are not standard and they are wearing rubber gloves that they are wearing mbber gloves that only cover they are wearing rubber gloves that only cover their wrists, exposing their arms to danger and jeopardy. That is nothing short of a national scandal. How could we allow this to happen? The hypocrisy of clapping NHS workers and yet the government not supporting them to go into that front line is tragic, and it was preventable, I am sorry to say but it was preventable. We had the Secretary of State for Health on the programme last week and I questioned him pretty closely about supply of equipment. Matt Hancock was saying in innumerable numbers of lorries would be out over the weekend, this was last Thursday, and he said by Sunday, all hospitals would have sufficient personal protective equipment and here we are one week on and know they don’t. You have heard what Richard had to say. This is a big challenge but we are ramping up supply rapidly. I’m sorry to hear of the problem at Shrewsbury Hospital. You can’t be surprised by what you have heard because we have been hearing it since last week. I am hearing it myself and I am a Cabinet minister responsible for [oral Cabinet minister responsible for local government looking after [oral government looking after social local government looking after social care so I hear local government looking after social care so I hearfrom local government looking after social care so I hear from social social rare so I hear from social rare providers social care so I hear from social care providers as well. We need to rare providers as well. We need to get this care providers as well. We need to get this equipment not care providers as well. We need to get this equipment notjust to get this equipment not just to hospitals get this equipment notjust to hospitals but to care homes, pharmacies, GPs, those in homeless shelters and other important settings. We are now getting significant quantities, tens of millions of treatment items from gloves and face mask and other items of PPE ﬂowing gloves and face mask and other items of PPE flowing through. This has now of PPE ﬂowing through. This has now become a of PPE flowing through. This has now become a military operation for us. We have seen pictures of the Armed Forces delivering this to hospitals. Richard is shaking his head. SuppUes Richard is shaking his head. Supplies are flowing through to Supplies are ﬂowing through to hospitals. Supplies are flowing through to hospitals. Robert, can you tell us hospitals. Robert, ran you tell us tonight, there hospitals. Robert, can you tell us tonight, there will be a number of GPs and those working in the health rare system GPs and those working in the health care system watching at home, when rare system watching at home, when do you think care system watching at home, when do you think people who need it in the health system will have the correct and sufficient personal protective equipment, when will that be? I can’t give you an exact time. So you don’t know? What I do know is So you don’t know? what I do know is in the last So you don’t know? What I do know is in the last 48 hours, 25 million packs of gloves have been delivered and 15 million facemasks. Almost 2 million items of eye protection. These are large quantities. We probably need much more than that but we are ramping it up. Robert, listen, I know what you think you are saying is true, I know that you believe it but it it simply not tme. believe it but it it simply not true. These are the messages I have tme. These are the messages I have had today. The true. These are the messages I have had today. The lack of clear guidance on testing is causing huge anxiety. Totally inadequate PPE. Being sent like lambs to the slaughter. Inadequate PPE. No scrubs and no testing equipment. Sleepwalking into this totally unequipped and no prepared when we had the luxury of two months to prepare that other countries didn’t. That’s why it is a national scandal. We need to get much more equipment out there and it is happening. Primarily now PPE is a logistical question. We have very large stocks and we need to get it to the front line. On testing, we are increasing the amount of testing available and again we need to go further because this is all about testing. One day last week I think we reached 8000 tests. We are averaging somewhat below that and we want to get up to 10,000, and ultimately 25000 and then 250,000. There is a huge effort to be done. 0n the antibody test, to be done. On the antibody test, the test for people who have already the test for peopla who have already had it, the test for people who have already had it, there we have already ordered 3.5 million of those tests. We are testing that test to ensure it is reliable. As the Chief Medical Officer has said, that is very important, there is nothing worse than an unreliable test, but if we prove it is reliable then we have millions of those flowing and within millions of those ﬂowing and within weeks they millions of those flowing and within weeks they should be in the system. Sticking to the personal protective equipment for the moment, because that is what Adam was asking about. Humphrey, what is your view? What I Humphrey, what is your view? what I have to say to Humphrey, what is your view? What I have to say to Adam, again, a huge thank you for everything he and the hundreds of thousands of GPs who are in many situations in the front line of what is happening here. I have good friends who are GPs who are doing tests of patients and checking them in the car parks of surgeries them in the rar parks of surgeries because them in the car parks of surgeries because it is not safe to bring them inside, and they are working double, inside, and they are working doubla, tripla and inside, and they are working double, triple and quadruple shift sometimes. A huge thank you to what is going on in that regard. I have to say I have a lot of sympathy with the views Richard expressed. It is hard to understand why we got caught hard to understand why we got taught as short hard to understand why we got caught as short as we did in this crisis. Why as short as we did in this crisis. why we didn’t as short as we did in this crisis. Why we didn’t have the foresight to understand more and take the steps we could have taken with equipment, tests and many other aspects of what we need to be ready for this. I’m not talking about long—range not talking about long-range planning not talking about long—range planning over two or three years, I’m saying when we saw it happen in China and then Italy so close to home. I have good friends in Italy who hi have been speaking to on the phone since late January and early phone since late january and earty February and phone since late January and early February and it was very clear what was happening. I think the government has to take away these lessons from that. Of course, that lassons from that. Of course, that doesn’t help lessons from that. Of course, that doesn’t help now, now it is about getting stuff through the front line. That is a logistics and business problem and I know a little bit about those things will stop it’s about making sure you have so much focus on managing the supply and ﬂow much focus on managing the supply and flow of product and I hope the and ﬂow of product and I hope the government is and flow of product and I hope the government is getting the best help it ran government is getting the best help it can there because that absolutely it ran there because that absolutely is a it can there because that absolutely is a solvable problem stop if there are 30 million pairs of gloves in the country then they absolutely should and could be with people in should and could be with peopla in the front should and could be with people in the front line so let’s get that done. A tweet from Christopher Luke, a psychiatric nurse working on an acute mental health what will stop myself and many colleagues feel patients and staff have been all but forgotten about. We have very little in the way of PPE, personal protective equipment, and mental health hospitals across the country are not equipped for something like Covid-19 are not equipped for something like Covid—19 and there has been no Covid-19 and there has been no coverage Covid—19 and there has been no coverage about how mental health hospitals are coping. What provisions are being made for staff and patients in psychiatric hospitals taking into consideration the level of risk we work with a side from the risk of catching Covid—19. Absolutely. We ask people Covid-19. Absolutely. We ask peopla to do Covid—19. Absolutely. We ask people to do everything to look after us at our most vulnerable. We applaud them, we love them, we love their self-sacrifice, them, we love them, we love their self—sacrifice, but we don’t seem to self-sacrifice, but we don’t seem to be able to self—sacrifice, but we don’t seem to be able to provide the most basic protection. In Michael local protection. In Michael [oral authority, I protection. In Michael local authority, I know we got 300 masks and gloves and wipes. But authority, I know we got 300 masks and gloves and wipes. Butjust 300. and gloves and wipes. But just 300. -- in my [oral and gloves and wipes. Butjust 300. —— in my local authority. They had -- in my [oral authority. They had to work out —— in my local authority. They had to work out who would get them and who wouldn’t. For social care who wouldn’t. For social rare workers, who wouldn’t. For social care workers, people on zero—hour workers, peopla on zero-hour contracts, workers, people on zero—hour contracts, those working with the most vulnerable, how many of those most vulnerabla, how many of those ran have most vulnerable, how many of those can have the most basic maths, that ran have the most basic maths, that are not can have the most basic maths, that are not even of WHO standard anyway. -- basic are not even of WHO standard anyway. —— basic masks. There is a risk of -- basic masks. There is a risk of those people —— basic masks. There is a risk of those people catching it themselves and they may also be spreading it, which is the last thing they want to be. People going into A&E, working be. People going into AaE, working there, be. People going into A&E, working there, cleaning in there, the last thing they want to do is be part of the problem. They want to be part of the solution and if we are not able to provide those basic things then dearty we to provide those basic things then clearly we have a problem. But I dearty we have a problem. But I actually think clearly we have a problem. But I actually think it is about testing. The head of the WHO said this is all about test, test, test. The government might have 3.5 million tests to find out if we have had it, we should have had those sorts of numbers, surely, for tests as to whether or not people actually have whether or not peopla actually have it at the whether or not people actually have it at the moment so we can know it at the moment so we ran know whether or it at the moment so we can know whether or not they ought to be working in A&E or whether they are working in “IE or whether they are spreading it. working in A&E or whether they are spreading it. How can we possibly spreading it. How ran we possibly work out spreading it. How can we possibly work out who is catching it and who we might have given it to if we don’t know we have had it ourselves? So many people are not even asked to all So many people are not even asked to (211111 but So many people are not even asked to call 111 but to look up online the (211111 but to look up online the symptoms call 111 but to look up online the symptoms and then self—isolate. As a symptoms and then self-isolate. As a country at the symptoms and then self—isolate. As a country at the moment we don’t seem to have any idea really apart from deaths as to how many people even have the disease, which does make it really difficult to manage. That is a good point. We saw the research coming out from Oxford. As a statistician earlier in my life I a statistician eartier in my life I thought we a statistician earlier in my life I thought we could have at least worked out some tests in the country to give us at least a guide to what the penetration rate of the virus is and that would be enormously helpful. When we knew this was helpful. when we knew this was coming late helpful. When we knew this was coming late January, early February, coming late january, earty Febmary, the coming late January, early February, the standard public health approach to an epidemic issue test, test, test. Then in an infectious outbreak you isolate, you quarantine, you contact trays, you track down every singla contact trays, you track down every singlc contact contact trays, you track down every single contact and test that person singla contact and test that person as well single contact and test that person as well to see if you can extinguish as well to see if you ran extinguish and stop the as well to see if you can extinguish and stop the lines of transmission. That is the way you stop the outbreak. We did not do that. We forgot the most fundamental principlas forgot the most fundamental principles of outbreak control. We principlas of outbreak control. We did do did do contact tracing. To begin with. You are not doing that now. We were acting upon expert medical advice and I appreciate they can advice and I appreciate they ran have advice and I appreciate they can have differences of opinion, the media have differences of opinion, the medics and the scientist. Nothing is media and the scientist. Nothing is dear-cut medics and the scientist. Nothing is clear—cut in a situation like this, dear-cut in a situation like this, but we are clear—cut in a situation like this, but we are guided by them. The contact tracing that was done for example from the people coming from China and other areas appeared to be successful and was held up well by international standards. But that did not stop the epidemic, did it? In fact the strategy we ended up following because we wanted to get 601: following because we wanted to get 60% of the population infected because we made the mistake in judgment that we thought it was a mild infection. The policy the government had, advised by the Chief Medical Officer and our chief scientific adviser, is to save as many people’s lives as possible. That message changed ten days ago. In the earty That message changed ten days ago. In the early part of the epidemic it In the earty part of the epidemic it was not In the early part of the epidemic it was not the case that the message was not the rase that the message was protect was not the case that the message was protect the NHS and save lives. The message was, we are going to manage an epidemic in the population, get to 60%, get to herd population, get to 6096, get to herd immunity. But population, get to 60%, get to herd immunity. But there are many examples of people on the record, from the chief scientific adviser, two statisticians and modellers as part of the early stage, advising part of the earty stage, advising the part of the early stage, advising the government and saying that was the objective. Then you stopped it when you realise the NHS could not cope with the intensity. The government policy today is very dear government policy today is very clear that we all need to play a part by staying at home, that is the best way to protect the NHS and that is the way within all of our power we ran help to is the way within all of our power we can help to save lives. It is six we ran help to save lives. It is six weeks too we can help to save lives. It is six weeks too late. I accept it is government policy now, but don’t you agree that it is ironic as a country we are the country that invented the test, but we seem to be the country without it and everybody else seems to be able to test and yet Britain is testing so little. I don’t think that is fair. There are countries that have tested more than we have, but the testing that we have is broadly similar to other major countries. Germany has broadly similar to other major countries. Germany hasjust countries. Germany has just increased countries. Germany hasjust increased the number of tests. We have heard a lot about the supply problam, have heard a lot about the supply problem, getting enough test, which problam, getting enough test, which sounds problem, getting enough test, which sounds plausible. Germany somehow seems to be circumventing that sunplv seems to be circumventing that supply problem and has now increased its testing to 500,000 a week. The UK has tested 90,000 overall. How is Germany getting past the supply problem and we are not? What we are problem and we are not? what we are trying to do is to problem and we are not? What we are trying to do is to ramp up production as quickly as we can. production as quickly as we ran. Everyone production as quickly as we can. Everyone understands the NHS, the Department of Health, the industry, is working as hard as possible, we are working around the clock to do this, nobody is going slow on this. No one is suggesting that. There is reason to believe the testing will be able to step up quite significantly in the next week or so, it is going in a positive direction on that. Then there is the potential of the antibody test and there are millions of those that are available, if it can be proven to be availabla, if it ran be proven to be reliabla, and available, if it can be proven to be reliable, and that could be a game reliabla, and that could be a game changer. Let’s reliable, and that could be a game changer. Let’s take another question. There are so many different aspects of this whole thing that we need to talk about. Let’s hear from Joanne, thing that we need to talk about. Let’s hearfrom Joanne, who is from Let’s hear from joanne, who is from Shrewsbury, Let’s hearfrom Joanne, who is from Shrewsbury, who is an NHS administrator. Has the lack of clarity and government guidance led to a situation where companies and peopla ran to a situation where companies and people can deliberately or unintentionally misinterpret the mles. unintentionally misinterpret the rules. For example, construction mles. For example, constmction companies and rules. For example, construction companies and nonessential shops stay open, leading to crowded transport and continuing with social gatherings. Humphrey, what is your view on this? It is a good question from joanne. view on this? It is a good question from Joanne. From my point of view, from joanne. From my point of view, there was from Joanne. From my point of view, there was no lack of clarity at all in terms of what came through an acrylic to the government and the Prime Minister. He was crystal clear when he wanted things to change in the last week or so. There are questions about whether earlier in questions about whether eartier in the process questions about whether earlier in the process things were quite as clear, but we were left in no doubt when Friday night came that we had to cease operating and do it quickly. I don’t think there was any doubt for people on Monday night doubt for peopla on Monday night about doubt for people on Monday night about the seriousness of the message that the Prime Minister was sending to everybody in the country, and the expectations that he said, that we really do stay—at—home and only essential work or essential travel should be undertaken. For some time prior to our closure we had been working predominantly, in fact overwhelmingly, from the point of view from our offices by home—working and we had trialled home-working and we had trialled that to home—working and we had trialled that to check that we were able to do that and all the technology work. We moved all our technology people out, on our website we reset all our CCTV operations, so we were well prepared for it. I think it is very important that the guidance is clear and I think it is important that there is some enforcement behind it as well. It is very clear if you read the established literature that if we are going to suppress this virus and really bear down on spread and get the vital number well below zero, we have to accept a period, Richard will echo this, we have to accept a period of really tight dose accept a period of really tight close down and locked out. There is a really national obligation to observe that. It is disheartening when you hear the evening after the Prime Minister did what he did that people were having barbecues in their gardens and having 30 or A0 their gardens and having 30 or 40 peopla their gardens and having 30 or A0 people around for a laugh and peopla around for a laugh and thinking it people around for a laugh and thinking it was fun. This is not fun. I have got an 85—year—old fun. I have got an 85-year-old father, a fun. I have got an 85—year—old father, a wonderful guy, in a house in lockdown, I hope, in Devon, and I want another in lockdown, I hope, in Devon, and I want anotherfive in lockdown, I hope, in Devon, and I want another five years from him at least. He is thinking, only five?! I think all of us have to remember this is not about something nebulous, we have all got grandparents or older friends and relatives and people who are vulnerable because they are diabetic or have a condition, this is not a dissociated threat that we face, this is personal and there is a real obligation for that. Keep the guidance clear and we shall follow. joanne is guidance clear and we shall follow. Joanne is asking is the guidance joanne is asking is the guidance dear joanne is asking is the guidance clear enough Joanne is asking is the guidance clear enough as opposed to who should be going to work? Sorry, Richard. Let me read a tweet from Lorraine Kelly, not the one of ITV, I assume. Lorraine Kelly, not the one of ITV, Iassume. I Lorraine Kelly, not the one of ITV, I assume. I don’t know, if you are watching. why I assume. I don’t know, if you are watching. Why are construction workers are still putting themselves at risk on nonessential construction at risk on nonessential constmction sites? My at risk on nonessential construction sites? My husband is working on an NHS to site, which I am sure at this moment in time is not essential. I have seen many posts that show construction sites rammed with constmction sites rammed with peopla and construction sites rammed with people and no sanitisers or soap peopla and no sanitisers or soap dispensers. people and no sanitisers or soap dispensers. Why is the government dispensers. why is the government not shutting dispensers. Why is the government not shutting down all nonessential construction sites? At the bottom of constmction sites? At the bottom of my road construction sites? At the bottom of my road people are having a house my road peopla are having a house built and I my road people are having a house built and I spoke to the building foreman and he said it was impossible for them to remain socially distant, but they had to come to work. We have to shut it down. I completely agree with what Humphrey is saying and the spirit of the question. The story from China is very instructive and this is what we have to prepare the public for. Wuhan, a city of 11 million people Wuhan, a city of 11 million peopla were Wuhan, a city of 11 million people were shut Wuhan, a city of 11 million people were shutdown on Wuhan, a city of 11 million people were shutdown onJanuary the 23rd. were shut down on january the 23rd. The best were shut down onJanuary the 23rd. The best estimates now are that those restrictions are only going to be able to be lifted in early April. That is roughly 11—12 weeks of a That is roughly 11-12 weeks of a city being That is roughly 11—12 weeks of a city being entirely shut That is roughly 11—12 weeks of a city being entirely shutdown in the city being entirely shut down in the “Y city being entirely shut down in the way only city being entirely shutdown in the way only China knows how to shut down a city. We have shut way only China knows how to shut down a city. We have shutdown, and down a city. We have shut down, and I agree the down a city. We have shutdown, and I agree the government has taken vital steps in this lockdown, but we have to really, really shut it down. You have got to shut it down as close to 100% as possible. Even dose to10096 as possible. Even then, I close to 100% as possible. Even then, I know we are not China, even then we have to prepare the public for 11-12 then we have to prepare the public for 11—12 weeks of this before we for 11-12 weeks of this before we ran start for 11—12 weeks of this before we can start even thinking about ran start even thinking about lifting can start even thinking about lifting restrictions. If we don’t shut it down, it will be longer than that. That is why it is so critical that the public understand the seriousness of the responsibility that everyone us holds. Robert, when it comes to construction sites, for it comes to constmction sites, for example, with it comes to construction sites, for example, with people crammed onto pub“: example, with people crammed onto public transport, why are you not shutting nonessential construction shutting nonessential constmction sites shutting nonessential construction sites down? You could just do it. Let me come to that in a moment, rather than singling out one occupation. The advice we received from the scientists and the medics, from the scientists and the media, and from the scientists and the medics, and world—class experts advising us, and world-class experts advising us, is that and world—class experts advising us, is that now is the right time in the passage of the virus to take much more significant steps. That is what the Prime Minister announced on Monday. In general, there has been a great degree of compliance with that. Most people understand there is a moral obligation on all of us to protect others, even if you are not concerned about your own health. Retailers and business owners, including owners of Retailers and business owners, including owners ofJames, have had including owners of james, have had to bear a huge including owners ofJames, have had to bear a huge burden from that, and to hear a huge burden from that, and the people to bear a huge burden from that, and the people working in them, and the vast majority of people have vast majority of peopla have complied vast majority of people have complied across the country. We are grateful for those employers and employees for taking that burden on. The advice we receive, however, is if you are not in those nonessential retail jobs, you if you are not in those nonessential retailjobs, you can still go to retail jobs, you ran still go to work. retailjobs, you can still go to work. You need to work from home if it is at all possible. That is really important. Everybody should find any way possible to do that, so find any way possibla to do that, so you minimise find any way possible to do that, so you minimise the amount of social contact you have, but if it is impossible to work from home, then the medical advice was you can still the medical advice was you ran still do the mediral advice was you ran still do that. the medical advice was you can still do that. You need to go directly to work, you need to be considerate about public transport, and that might mean things like varying the times you go to work so everyone is not crowded on public transport and the tube at the same time, that is a concern at the moment. And when you are in the workplace your employer needs to make sure you follow the Pub“: needs to make sure you follow the Public Health England guidelines. If you can’t do that, it is difficult to see how those businesses can to see how those businesses ran remain open. to see how those businesses can remain open. But in the main, they ran do. To remain open. But in the main, they can do. To take the example of construction, Public Health England constmction, Public Health England have construction, Public Health England have worked with the construction have worked with the constmction leadership have worked with the construction leadership Council, one of the industry bodies, to produce guidance to the types of setting, and it will not be all parts of the industry, but the types of setting where it would be safe to operate if you take certain measures that the experts have advised. I think that is a sensible way forward. Are you satisfied that is happening? There are so many examples coming in. I gave you one myself. I have seen some examples where it is concerning and those employers now need to take action. There are also lots of examples where it is sensible. We all have to appreciate these are difficult decisions and when you are considering looking down, as the term is, there is a balance to be struck. If you go too far, then it is not sustainable and you cannot is not sustainable and you rannot keep society is not sustainable and you cannot keep society with you for 11 or 12 weeks. You also need some parts of the economy, frankly, to be able to continue to operate, because we need people to be in work as far as they peopla to be in work as far as they ran be, we people to be in work as far as they can be, we need to produce things, ran be, we need to produce things, we do can be, we need to produce things, we do need to maintain the roads and the railways. In the construction the railways. In the constmction industry we the railways. In the construction industry we certainly need buildings to be well so they are safe and hygienic. We need to ensure really important programmes continue, like the removal of dangerous cladding from buildings, the programme that we launched after the Grenfell fire. we hunched after the Grenfell fire. There are we launched after the Grenfell fire. There are a lot of settings where it is in the public interest that work continues. We in government have to strike a sensible balance to keep as many people in work, and as much of many peopla in work, and as much of the economy many people in work, and as much of the economy functioning as possible, whilst protecting public health. Every time we take those steps, I ran Every time we take those steps, I can assure Every time we take those steps, I ran assure you Every time we take those steps, I can assure you that we are doing it ran assure you that we are doing it carefully and can assure you that we are doing it carefully and on the best advice from the medics and the scientists. from the media and the scientists. I hear you and I from the medics and the scientists. I hear you and I am from the medics and the scientists. I hearyou and I am not from the medics and the scientists. I hear you and I am not pretending that this is in any way an easy thing because I get the sense from the government that there is attention between those who are very keen on keeping the economy going, and one completely understands that, and those that are primarily keen on protecting public health. I have to 55V protecting public health. I have to say that I think the protection of life tmmps say that I think the protection of life trumps everything and ought to life tmmps everything and ought to tmmp life trumps everything and ought to trump everything. And so was, of tmmp everything. And so was, of course, ideally trump everything. And so was, of course, ideally we want to keep our economy going, we course, ideally we want to keep our economy going, wejust course, ideally we want to keep our economy going, we just have to not compromise when it comes to people compromise when it comes to peopla going to work compromise when it comes to people going to work on public transport in order to build a block of flats, order to build a block of ﬂats, which they order to build a block of flats, which they simply can’t put the windows in was being two metres apart. You just cannot do the work. I don’t understand that it is done so publicly. I don’t understand why they are still allowed to do it and why the government does not make it clear that this is not on, they are not to work in that way, this is not essential work. not to work in that way, this is not essentialwork. I not to work in that way, this is not essential work. I hear what you say about there being sometimes when you need to have builders, of course you do. You cannot have an elderly do. You cannot have an elderty person whose do. You cannot have an elderly person whose heater stops working. They need to have hot water. Those circumstances are one thing, but building and the construction workers at the moment does not make any sense. The problem is, I think the vast majority of British people the vast majority of British peopla want to the vast majority of British people want to do the right thing, faced with this terrible crisis. But what they need is clear leadership and they need as part of that leadership, first of all, this is what we expect you to do, but they also need as part of that leadership, and this is what we will do for you in return, so we will make sure that you have an income, no matter who you are. That there will be food available for you, when you go to the shops there will be a proper supply of food and you will not lose your home. And obviously we are doing everything we can to make are doing everything we ran to make sure the are doing everything we can to make sure the NHS can stand up to this sure the NHS ran stand up to this terrible sure the NHS can stand up to this terrible burden which has been thrown at it. If we had that partnership, then I think we can get partnership, then I think we ran get through this. In partnership, then I think we can get through this. In many ways the government is doing the right thing, but there are some glaring things that you are missing and I think you should get on with that. To a nswer To answer that point, we are doing the things you have set out. The package of measures we have now put out for the economy to support individuals and families, there is no precedent in our history. Absolutely, and I acknowledge that. Compared to other countries who are battling with the same problem, it battling with the same problam, it compares battling with the same problem, it compares favourably and is among the most comprehensive package of support among developed countries in the world. Looking at the initiatives, in my department in seven days we have put together a programme to try to deliver food parcels to those of the 1.5 million people who we are shielding, those people who need to be at home for specific medical reasons, who can’t have face—to—face contact other than have face-to-face contact other than with their have face—to—face contact other than with their partners or members of their household, for the next 12 weeks. For their household, for the next 12 weeks. Forthose their household, for the next 12 weeks. For those people, their household, for the next 12 weeks. Forthose people, I their household, for the next 12 weeks. For those people, I hope on Saturday the first food parcels of land on their doorsteps. Huge efforts are happening. I’m not saying this to seek praise for me, I am saying it for the thousands of peopla am saying it for the thousands of people across government, from town peopla across government, from town halls to people across government, from town halls to Whitehall. But that is such a good example of where the problem is. It is wonderful, we have all these volunteers. 400,000 people coming forward to volunteer support. 500,000. It’s brilliant, probably 700,000 by the end of the night. People want to do the right thing and support one another. It’s great the government is organising food parcels and that is brilliant, but they will arrive without masks and without gloves because that bit has fallen down. You don’t need a mask to deliver a food parcel to someone’s door. But the carer going someone’s door. But the rarer going in will someone’s door. But the carer going in will need them. All I’m saying is that the government has done a great deal but it needs to go further and these things need to be said. You were talking about the balancing act between the economy and public health. As you know and as the labour Party health. As you know and as the Labour Party has said many times, labour Party has said many times, austerity costs Labour Party has said many times, austerity costs lives. You are saying public health trumps that saying public health tmmps that every time saying public health trumps that every time but nonetheless, there is a balance here somewhere and won the labour Party has a balance here somewhere and won the Labour Party has talked about many labour Party has talked about many times in Labour Party has talked about many times in terms of the cost of austerity. You must be worried about that. Getting construction workers that. Getting constmction workers of the that. Getting construction workers of the site or whoever it might be, but the bill has to be paid by somebody. I agree and I but the bill has to be paid by somebody. I agree and Ifully understand this is a crisis, but when you have a crisis I am afraid you have to do the right thing. If we are talking about austerity than I think it would also be right to 55V I think it would also be right to say that we would have been in a much better position if before this crisis the beds in the hospitals were not at 95% capacity, if we were not at 9596 capacity, if we didn’t were not at 95% capacity, if we didn’t have 100,000 vacancies in the National Health Service, and if we had as a result of austerity stops the money we paid for nurses to get trained. The stripping out of public services in many ways are being exposed by this crisis and it is very unfortunate that the country has gone through what it has. For example, people proclaiming Universal Credit for the first time not realising what it is sent to the changes that have been made to benefits and how hard life really is for those who have been living on benefits up to now. We want to get one member of the public in... Our policy is about saving lives. There is no balancing act with the economy. We are focused on saving lives. But there is a direct correlation between the public health outcome and some of these measures because if you want to sustain a lockdown or very restrictive measures on all our lives for a long period of time, potentially 12 weeks, you have to think very carefully about that. If you completely close—down society, you completely dose-down society, if you make it you completely close—down society, if you make it impossible for anyone to work or make products or services then you may find... I am not then you may find... lam not calling for that, then you may find... I am not calling for that, of course I’m not falling for that, of course I’m not calling for calling for that, of course I’m not calling for essential products and services to stop. What I am saying services to stop. what I am saying is we services to stop. What I am saying is we need clear leadership and if is we need dear leadership and if there is is we need clear leadership and if there is clear leadership I believe the British people will follow. I the British peopla will follow. I hope the British people will follow. I hope we have done that because our message to the British people watching is very clear this evening. If you stay at home you will protect the NHS and save lives. With respect the NHS and save lives. with respect to work, it is the NHS and save lives. With respect to work, it is simply, work from home if you ran to work, it is simply, work from home if you can and if that is home if you ran and if that is impossible, home if you can and if that is impossible, go to work but only if you ran follow impossible, go to work but only if you can follow the guidelines from you ran follow the guidelines from Pub“: you can follow the guidelines from Public Health England and do so in a safe manner. On clear messaging, safe manner. On dear messaging, Richard safe manner. On clear messaging, Richard was talking about a lockdown, for want of a different phrase, of lockdown, for want of a different phrase, of“ lockdown, for want of a different phrase, of 11 or 12 weeks. Is that what you’re saying tonight, that’s how long it could be, in the government’s view? The measures we have implemented, we said we will review them at Easter and that is a sensible period of time to see how they are working. Nobody is pretending this will be over by Easter but we do think, and this is backed up by medical opinion, if each and every one of us does what we are asked to do and we do the things we have described, staying at home whenever we can, if we either home whenever we ran, if we either don’t go to work, home whenever we can, if we either don’t go to work, or if we do so we follow the guidance of Public Health England, if we all do that then there is reason to believe that within that sort of period we could see the beginnings of the turn of the tide. But it is on all the fuss to take those steps in our own lives, as well as all the amazing peopla in lives, as well as all the amazing people in the NHS who will be peopla in the NHS who will be fighting to people in the NHS who will be fighting to save lives. I think we need to prepare the public for this period of 12 weeks. We really do. It is a really tough challenge but the reason why we should prepare them for that period is that if we don’t suppress it in that 12 weeks it will go on even longer. That’s why we have to be tough new in order to get have to be tough now in order to get through this and have to be tough new in order to get through this and have the have to be tough now in order to get through this and have the economy return, I through this and have the economy return, Ifully agree, returned to some semblance of order. I think that’s right. We have to level with people about how tough this will be peopla about how tough this will be for people about how tough this will be for some in society. That is why the NHS has written for example to 1.5 million people, and those letters will have been dropping on doormats over the course of this week. That is saying to those people who have is saying to those peopla who have specific is saying to those people who have specific clinical reasons that put them at high risk from this virus, as soon as you receive this, you should now stay—at—home for the next should now stay-at-home for the next 12 weeks should now stay—at—home for the next 12 weeks and have no face to face contact the van with the loved ones who are in your household already. It is almost unimaginable. None of us take this decision lightly. Having said that, if we can look Having said that, if we ran look after Having said that, if we can look after these people, we have used the term shielding, if you can metaphorically put our arms around those peopla metaphorically put our arms around those people then that is the best “Y those people then that is the best way of protecting the country. I fully agree. Because they are the most at risk people. That is why the most at risk peopla. That is why the work we most at risk people. That is why the work we are doing with getting food parcels and delivering medicines, it will save thousands of lives if it works. We have had a tweet come in in the last A0 seconds from Eleanor in the last 40 seconds from Eleanor Chapman who in the last A0 seconds from Eleanor Chapman who asks, how long does the government anticipate this pandemic will last and that is the $64,000 question. How long will it last and how ran question. How long will it last and how can we keep going if it goes on? how ran we keep going if it goes on? What how ran we keep going if it goes on? what is how can we keep going if it goes on? What is the scientific best estimate what is the scientific best estimate for the What is the scientific best estimate for the moment? We have about 20 seconds but it is an important question. Prepare yourself for 11 or 12 weeks in this country. Remember, this outbreak will come back, most likely later in the year in a second wave and possibly a third wave. We don’t know enough about the virus yet to be 100% don’t know enough about the virus yet to be100% sure but we are yet to be10096 sure but we are seeing it go yet to be100% sure but we are seeing it go across the world east to west, America, Latin America, Africa, there is a lot more to come. On that very jolly Africa, there is a lot more to come. On that veryjolly note, thank you On that very jolly note, thank you Richard. On that veryjolly note, thank you Richard. The hour is up. Question Time will be back next week and for the foreseeable future we will be live at HPN on a Thursday night. Our recorded questions came from Shrewsbury this week. Next week we were going to be in rugby and we were going to be in mgby and we will be were going to be in rugby and we will be there virtually at least. If you will be there virtually at least. If you want to submit a pre—recorded you want to submit a pre-recorded question from you want to submit a pre—recorded question from rugby get in touch via question from mgby get in touch via the question from rugby get in touch via the website. And if you want to join in the conversation we have been having here, you can listen to having here, you ran listen to Adrian having here, you can listen to Adrian Childs and guests on Question Time extra time on radio five lives. Thank you for being socially distant and responsible to our panel. For those who have got in touch, and forgive me for not getting to the questions from some of you. From all of us at Question Time, and by.