Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, George Eustice, Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Labour’s newly appointed Shadow Home Secretary, Nick Thomas—Symonds, who joins us down the line from his constituency in South Wales. Afua Hirsch, commentator, broadcaster and author of a book on British identity, Brit(ish): On Race, Identity and Belonging. Juergen Meyer, industrialist and former chief executive of Siemens, business adviser and board member of the Northern Powerhouse partnership. He joins us from Manchester. And Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, an organisation for all of England’s ambulance, community, hospital and mental health trusts. Good evening. Welcome very much to our panellists here, and of course toJuergen and Nick, who arejoining us down the line. You know the score by now. We have no physical audience here in the studio. But this week’s pre—recorded questions come from Newcastle, which is where we were intending to be before all of this happened. And we’ll be taking a couple of questions live as well tonight. And as usual of course we’ve been hearing from you at home via social media, and if you want to keep on feeding your questions and your comments in, contact us on social media, @bbcquestiontime. I’ll get them on this tablet here and I’ll feed those in to the panel as we go along. So let’s take our first question tonight, and we arejoined by Margaret Collins. Margaret, good evening. Good evening. I have many questions concerning our Government’s handling of the coronavirus, but this morning I read, according to statistics from John Hopkins University, Sweden has 28 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants. Norway has four deaths per 100,000 inhabitants. Denmark has 8.7, Finland has 4.5. Even the USA has less than the UK, at 21.7. So they are all lower than the UK, which has a nationwide lockdown, and the toll is significantly higher, at 44.1; per 100,000 inhabitants. My question is why and how did the Government let this happen when we had advanced warning of the figures coming out of other countries? As a country, we are meant to be celebrating VE Day tomorrow, but who feels like celebrating? I don’t feel particularly proud of being British when I see figures like that. Chris, let’s start with you. Well, the death rate is clearly very concerning. And we can talk about numbers but behind each individual number there is a personal tragedy for both the individual concerned but also their relatives and families. But what do you think when you hear Margaret list those numbers like that? Well, it’s very concerning. If you look at the levels of mortality that we have in this country. I do think, though, when I talk to my public health colleagues, what they say to me is, "Just be very careful about making international comparisons at this point," because there are a number of different reasons as to why different countries may have different death rates. For example, there isn’t a single universal way of recording coronavirus... I get that, and obviously that’s something the Government have been very keen to say. But, nonetheless, whether we are the worst in Europe, we’ve got the highest death toll in Europe or the second highest rate in Europe, maybe even the third, it’s not where anyone would want to be. And Margaret’s question is why has this happened? What’s your view, given your at the coal face with the ambulance workers and the hospital workers? Well, quite rightly, Margaret wants an answer to that question, given the level we’re at. The reality is we are going to have to wait to do the real detailed analysis to find out what has happened here. And I think, as I said, it’s dangerous, and that’s certainly what our public health expert colleagues say, to draw conclusions at this point. But, clearly, with 30,000 deaths, it is a real issue. I think there are some conclusions we can draw. I’m not party to the intelligence and information that the Government has but I remember in February two local schools where I live in south London were closed because of coronavirus outbreaks and concerns of the infection spreading. By then, other countries were already implementing lockdown measures, and it was weeks before our Government started to take this seriously. And I think that Margaret’s question, which is a really sad one and an honest one to hear, has kind of two components. One, why has the Government handled it this way? Why has everything taken so long? Why do we always feel like we’re playing catch up on PPE, lockdown measures? And then the second component is the Government’s tone. Because, for me, to hear our Government congratulating itself on the way it’s handled this outbreak... So BorisJohnson called it "Our apparent success. It’s insulting to the people who continue to die every day, and what I would like to see is honesty from the Government, acknowledging that this was not well handled, that mistakes have been made, and telling us clearly and transparently what they intend to do differently. Because at the moment the gulf between what we are experiencing, the number of people who are dying, the heartbreaking scenarios of people dying alone, often in unnecessary circumstances because we haven’t got a grip on this, and the Government’s rhetoric is only losing further tmst. And I think trust is important right now, and until the Government show some honesty and integrity we can’t even begin to see how we can move forward. And, Juergen, I saw you were nodding at that? Well, yeah, I think Margaret’s question is absolutely spot on, and what you said in your question, Margaret, is that we didn’t plan ahead. So we are managing this in the here and now and that makes managing a crisis like this unbelievably difficult, and I think we should say a huge thank—you to all of the people who are doing that, but what should have happened is we should have spent much more time planning early on. And we saw the signs from Italy, and we knew that we had to put testing capacity in place, and we didn’t do that early enough. And we didn’t lock down fast enough. You know, there should have been a hard, fast lockdown. And, in hindsight, we know that would have been better, but we didn’t plan well enough ahead, I’m afraid. It is interesting, because in February the UK was ranked second best placed to deal with a pandemic. This was by the Global Health Security Index. Margaret saying, "How has the Government let it happen where we have a death toll as we have?" Nick? Well, it clearly isn’t a reason for celebration, Fiona. It’s an extraordinary tragedy for our country, and a tragedy for each and every family, and to see that figure today of over 30,600 deaths was startling, and shocking. So what did you think when the Prime Minister described it, talked about our response to the pandemic as our apparent success? Well, it’s not a success or an apparent success, Fiona, and throughout this crisis we have quite rightly supported the Government in its aim of minimising loss of life. But we’ve also called out things when we thought the Government wasn’t acting quite the way that it should, and there are questions about how well—prepared the country was for this particular type of pandemic. But we were also slow in lockdown, slow in terms of a comprehensive testing and tracing strategy, and there have been significant problems between what the Government has said is available, in terms of personal protective equipment, and what has actually got to the front line... And you say that the Government was... Sorry, cutting across you. You say the Government was too slow in introducing the lockdown. Was Labour calling for the lockdown to be introduced earlier? Yes, yes, absolutely, Fiona, and I was there are actually in the House of Commons on the 23rd of March and we actually called for the lockdown in the House of Commons prior to it being announced later that day. And I think that was something we raised on the floor of the House that day. But what about earlier than that? Because that was obviouslyjust a few hours earlier. If you’re saying the Government was too late in introducing a lockdown, presumably you don’t mean by a few hours. I don’t really recall that, but maybe I missed it, Labour calling for a lockdown in February, say, for example? No... Well, listen, what we’ve tried to do throughout this crisis is to be supportive, Fiona. You ask me about when we called for a lockdown. I was set in the House of Commons on the day that we did, but the point that I’m making, really, is that of course we will come to a point in the future when we must look very robustly, with great scrutiny, as to what the Government did and what differently it could have done throughout this crisis. We have to answer that question as to why we’ve ended up with this tragic death toll as we have. But at the same time we can’t simply say, "This is something for the future." I hope the Government is learning lessons as it is going along on the issues of testing and tracing, on the issues of personal protective equipment, to try to minimise loss of life going forward. George, apparent success. Is that how you describe it? Well, look, what the Prime Minister was describing there is what we have all done as a country, people who have stayed at home, observed social distancing, ourfabulous NHS, and everybody else who has responded to this crisis. That is all to save lives, and we now have this terrible death toll. Yeah, we are in an extraordinary time and it is right to acknowledge the steps everyone has taken, and that’s all the Prime Minister was doing. Look, I think the point I’d say here, it’s very difficult to make these international comparisons, because different countries are recording deaths in different ways. Different countries have different circumstances. London is a huge city with a big public transport system. That could have had an impact early on. There will be a time and a place to reflect and learn lessons from it. But... Now we are dealing with this epidemic and we... What is interesting about that is I’ve watched everyone, as you would expect in this job, every one of the press conferences at five o’clock since this started, and at the beginning in the first month or so when you are showing those international comparisons there was no reference to the fact that those comparisons might be a bit dodgy when we were below the other European countries. Now that we are above them the Government is very keen to point out that we shouldn’t be making these comparisons. You never said that early on. Well, we weren’t making comparisons. We’ve always tracked the death rates that have been recorded in all countries. So you didn’t warn us of them. We’ve tried to follow the advice of the Chief Medical Officer and Chief scientific advisor, and the belief all along, which I think was correct, is that we were roughly two, three weeks behind countries like Italy and France. We were on a different trajectory. That’s why it wasn’t appropriate to lockdown at the point that they did, but it’s not true that we weren’t prepared. There were all sorts of Cobra meetings and planning meetings taking place on this right from January onwards. ii It was occupying all Matt Hancock’s time. Lots of planning and preparation went into responding to this, but it was the case that the this, but it was the rase that the scientific this, but it was the case that the scientific advice was not that we should have locked down earlier than should have locked down eartier than we did and, should have locked down earlier than we did and, as soon as the advice was that we should lockdown, that’s what we did. This is what I mean by honesty. The government has been changing its narrative to fit its results so, initially, we liked international comparisons because they made us look good but, now they make us look bad, we can’t trust them. The advice on PPE was to use the equipment recommended by the WHO until it emerged we didn’t have it and then the advice was changed. The definition of testing was changed when it emerged we couldn’t meet the 100 tests. and then the PPE advice was changed to fit what we have. The definition of testing was changed when it emerged we couldn’t meet the 100,000 tests a day standard we promised until we suddenly could by changing what counts as a test, test having been sent out rather than a result having been received. And for those of us who are not medical experts, who are just members of the public watching people we know and love die, there is an unavoidable feeling that the Government is not being honest with us about the scale of the crisis. Yes, we’ve all done everything we can to try and mitigate this, and we are all trying to come together and help. That doesn’t make this a success. That makes us people who are suffering and doing our absolute best, in circumstances where we can’t help but feel that the leadership has failed us, and I think we deserve an honest acknowledgement of that. Well, it’s simply not true that there’s been, you know, dishonesty or anything on this. From the very beginning, we’ve been holding daily press conferences. The Chief Medical Officer has been attending many of those. And they’ve been very, very candid about the nature of this crisis, the reasons we are doing the things we are doing, and very candid about the evidence and the epidemiology behind it, so we’ve been I think as frank as possible with the public, and we’ve shared with all of ourthinking... So when the Health Secretary said... I think the bit that does need to be recognised here is if you wind back to ten, 12 weeks, and we were looking at what had happened in northern Italy, where their health system had been completely overwhelmed, and we had the awful prospect of people turning up to hospitals and simply not being able to be treated. And I think the bit that we do need to recognise is that the NHS has actually created 33,000 beds to treat coronavirus patients, we’ve created seven Nightingale hospitals, literally within the space of a fortnight... It’s not worked quite so well with the care sector, though, has it? No, absolutely, we recognise... I think everybody in the health and care system recognises it has not worked so well in the care homes. But all I’m saying is if you look at that prospect, the NHS was really clearly told, "You have to do everything to avoid that overwhelm," and I think the bit that we do need to recognise, because it’s due to the hard effort of the million front line staff, is that we have managed to avoid that overwhelm. And, as I said, it’s very difficult in a sense to kind of talk about celebration when we are talking about this in the context of 30,000 dead, but we should recognise... But why do you think... I mean, George is saying we did everything at the right time. The lockdown was done at the right time. Why do you think, then, if that is true, not according to you, Afua, why do you think we have so many deaths, then? Well, I think it’s really difficult to tell at this point here. And, as I said, I know that people, quite rightly, want the answers, but there are potentially lots of reasons. If you look at population density, that is clearly one. I think you raise, quite correctly, the fact that our social care sector has been completely neglected and we know that what happens in a crisis is that the crisis inevitably finds the weakest link in terms of the area that’s been underinvested in that hasn’t been sorted out. So there are some reasons, I’m sure, but all I’m saying is we need to be careful aboutjumping to immediate conclusions on the basis of, to be frank, incomplete evidence at this point. Nick, oh, sorry, yes. You know, all this discussion about comparisons and "We are not sure". I mean, I think the data is good enough for us to say that a country like ours, like Britain, with all of its capability, we should have done better. We should be doing better. There is no doubt about that in my mind. And I think in terms of the planning, and I’d like to come back to this point of testing. You know, we didn’t plan ahead well enough. If we would have done we would have had the tests of the 100,000 in place by the beginning of April, not starting building it at the beginning of April. we’ve got a long way to go. We need to live and manage the situation, and I do agree with Afua’s point that a bit of honesty, a bit of learning, so we can learn as we go into the next phase and really make sure that we make a betterjob, as we now try and exit out of this terrible situation. Nick, you had your hand up, you want to come in. George is saying the Government has been candid throughout. Do you feel that? Well, the Government has been inconsistent, not least around the issues of testing and tracing. The lockdown was absolutely essential, but it was a blunt instrument unless you had a testing and tracing strategy. Now, the Government was actually doing community testing but it stopped doing that on the 12th of March. Originally it was said that was a policy decision, but more lately it seems it’s been admitted that that was because of a lack of capacity. Now, it took weeks and weeks after that for the Government to then start to actually ramp up testing to the level that it needed to be at. But it’s not got to that yet, and I’m afraid that hitting the target on the 30th of April, it seems that that was done by putting a number of tests in the post without an actual guarantee that those tests had been used. And we’ve seen the test again falling below 100,000 in recent days. Now, that needs to be ramped up again significantly, and it needs to be attached to a proper tracing strategy. And that really has to be a focus now for the Government in the weeks ahead. Let me come back to Margaret. Margaret, you’ve set here very patiently and listened to that, and thank you for that. You said figures like the ones you quoted don’t make you feel proud to be British. What do you feel about the responses you’ve heard? 0h. . . just disappointed. They haven’t really answered anything. And I agree with some of the points. We’ve got to wait and see. However... So what would your question... We’ve got George Eustice here from the Government. What would your question be directly to him? Why didn’t we have testing, PPE earlier? The Government must have known about it. Well, we have ramped up testing considerably, so we have... That’s not the question. The question is why didn’t you have it earlier. Well, there are some countries that had more diagnostic labs, so countries like Germany had a lot of those diagnostic labs. We had to expand them from scratch. And the Army had been involved in this and did a fantasticjob. We’ve now got 90 mobile testing units around the country, 50 drive through... But could you have ramped it up earlier? I mean, there’s been an enormous effort... They ramped it up as quickly as they could, and we are now about 100,000 capacity and it’s going to double again over the next month. We will be ramping it up further. Margaret, does not satisfy you? No. I should see as well... I’m full of praise for the NHS. I’m not criticising the NHS. I think they’ve done a wonderfuljob. I’m criticising the Government’s lack of preparedness. 0K. Well, listen, Margaret, thank you very much for your contribution this evening. Let’s take another question now. Let’s talk to James Clancy. James, would you like to give us your question? Yes. Good evening. One of the major issues that will concern many viewers, who will download the mobile app, is our reluctance for the Government to access our private data, and all the privacy issues of using such data. For track, trace and quarantine to be a success it is essential that the Authorities have access to our personal data, then they can track if we have caught the virus, to pinpoint where we have been, and who we’ve had contact with. When measured against what we have already lost — our freedom to socialise, our future economic and job prospects, not to mention the potential danger to our health — does the panel feel it is a small price to pay to share part of our personal data to control and quell this virus until the vaccine can be found? And, James, what do you think? Do you think it is a price worth paying? I do think it’s a price worth paying, but I also as well think we should be doing more. We’ve got to help these tracers to get at least a 70—90% success rate if track and tracing is going to be successful. OK. So, George... So I think it’s a well... That’s why I phrased the question the way I did, because I think it is a price well worth paying. 50, George, the app has launched... It has been trialled on the Isle of Wight as of today. You obviously do think it is a price worth paying, clearly, because that’s why you’ve launched it. Can you just explain to us the detail of how it’s going to work? Say, for example, the app thatJames is referring to, the tracing app, I get a ping on my phone saying I’ve been in contact with someone who has reported symptoms of the coronavirus. What happens then? So it’s been piloted, as you said, on the Isle of Wight, and the idea is that people will go on to the app, they will enter their phone number and their postcode — and no other personal details, by the way. And if their mobile phone is in contact for a certain length of time, and that’s being trialled in the pilot now, with mobile phones in that area, and that person subsequently shows symptoms and reports those symptoms then those other people who have been in close or regular contact with that person will receive a notification to say that someone who they were in close contact with has reported symptoms. And what should they then do? And they should then self—isolate as well. What, for a fortnight? For... That’s to be decided, but I think two weeks is one of the things that’s been said. And should they... And this is very powerful once you get to... But hang on, wait a minute, let’s understand how it works, though, just to be clear. Because this is something that may be coming the way of all of us. So you get an alert on your phone saying you’ve been in touch with someone who has reported symptoms of coronavirus, you self—isolate for a fortnight. And then, what, yourfamily has to self—isolate for a fortnight as well? These are details that are being worked through, but, essentially... We don’t know yet? We don’t know yet, no, and this is why we are piloting it in the Isle of Wight. This could be very powerful once you get to the point as life starts to... But this bit must have been worked out, because the people on the Isle of Wight are actually doing it. They must know what they should do when they... This Yes. 50... They should isolate, yes. And members of theirfamily? I think they should isolate as well, as is the case if anybody has got symptoms. But if they don’t show symptoms then obviously it a different matter. But this is quite powerful because it means... Hang on, hang on. So they should self—isolate if they have symptoms, but not if they don’t have symptoms? No, they should self—isolate initially, but if they don’t have symptoms then obviously they wouldn’t need to isolate for longer than that. Do they get tested? Are they going to get tested? These are things, though, that we are working through. Yes, testing in conjunction with this could be an option. But these are details that are being worked out. That’s why we are piloting it, to work out precisely how that would work. This could be very powerful, though, because it will show us where you get flare—ups in particular parts of the country, because lots of people will be reporting symptoms. So we’ll be able to track and monitor the progress of the virus and our success in getting it down, but also if there are hotspots that flare up and action is needed we will have that knowledge. The crucial thing, though, is it’s not going to be storing and recording people’s locations that can be identified to an individual. This is a system that keeps all of that data anonymous. It operates, you know, as a system that keeps people plus my identity in the clear of any involvement. And I know it only launched this morning. Do you know what the take—up has been on the Isle of Wight? Ah, no, I don’t have that data yet. It’s onlyjust been... It’s 20% so far. 0h, right. Chris knows. Well, that’s something. It’s 20% so far. Yes, it’s 20% so far. If the app is going to work then I think there are two or three things that need to happen. First, it clearly does need to work in terms of, for example, there are some questions about how much battery power it pulls off an iPhone. The second issue is it clearly needs to be linked to the right track and tracing resource. In other words, if, for example, you have been in close contact with somebody, you will want to get a test very, very quickly, and one of the issues is that by focusing, as we have done, on purely hitting that 100,000, as the Government has done — hitting that 100,000 target by April 30th, we haven’t really quite got the geographic spread that we need of testing. So that will need to be ramped up. Because you’ve talked about staff members having to wait, what, five days? Ithink, you know... To get a test. We should recognise the fact that testing capacity has grown really quite quickly, but the problem is if you just focus on the number of tests on April 30, you’re missing a whole bunch of things. Well, it is the only day we’ve had that number. The testing hotline is warning that test results could take 7—10 days. So if you have to go into self isolation... Well, that’s a real concern for some other... ..for two weeks, then you can’t get your results for 7—10 days... It’s a real concern for some of our trust leaders. So I was talking to a trust yesterday, I trust chief yesterday, a trust chief executive yesterday, the two weeks ago was able to get tests turned round within a day, but they’re now taking five days. What we are basically saying is, "Yes, OK, the capacity as part of the story in terms of growing the capacity," but what we’ve got to ensure is everybody who needs access to a test can get it quickly, and then the other thing we need to... And are you confident that will happen? Well, that’s the bit that’s still kind of needs... I mean, the NHS needs to play its part, but we also need support from the Government. The other bit, which is the bit we are specifically talking about, is as we exit and begin to ease lockdown, it will be really important for everybody in the NHS to know the role they are meant to be playing in terms of the use of this app and supporting it, and this is coming really quite quickly, but at the moment nobody in the NHS quite knows what role they’re meant to be playing to support the app. So what we will need is the results of that pilot, that trial, on the Isle of Wight, circulated very quickly. And all the trusts, GPs, 111 service, pharmacies that are absolutely at the front line and talking to patients, they’ll need to know very quickly what they are meant to be doing in a way that they don’t at the moment. Well, also people need to know how it works, and as George doesn’t seem to be completely clear about how it’s going to work but... I can’t help but feel that the Government keeps getting distracted by the wrong things. I mean, we were talking about why the Government didn’t have testing in place earlier. I think one of the reasons as they were too consumed with all these models and ideas about herd immunity instead of actually... Which now seems like a devastating idea. Instead of doing the work of getting testing, protective equipment, contact tracing in place. Now here’s this app, which forgive me if I don’t feel like the Government actually fully understand how it’s going to work, and... And we’re still not totally clear from what George was saying. Well, look, it’s being piloted. We don’t know how it’s going to work, and... But without testing... We’ve heard about the NHS care home staff who are on the front line, who are experiencing a catastrophic situation, still can’t get tests, then having to apply for them online, they are not getting them on time. Many care staff are saying every day they can’t get their hands on tests. How can whole sections of the population who are using this app, which the Government is encouraging people on the Isle of Wight to use, without any clear idea of whether they’ll be able to follow up with testing... And even though you said, George, that there won’t be masses of data on the database, my understanding is that once you sign up to the app, no, there isn’t a lot of data, but as soon as you develop symptoms of coronavirus you have to have that information stored on a database, otherwise it can’t work. Well, James is asking, is that a price worth paying? Well, I don’t know because I don’t have confidence that the information and data protection professionals have been consulted in this process. I mean, certainly I’ve seen data protection lawyers saying the Information Commissioner was not consulted on the development of this app, that it potentially fails the NHS app standards for data protection. There are so many questions about who was involved in this process, who was consulted, what. process, who was consulted. What assurances can the Government give a us in the data protection standards? And the NHS itself doesn’t have a perfect track record of storing patient data, so I think we have every right to be concerned. It may be that it is a price worth paying, but we need to be assured that a very rigorous process has been undergoing before we get to the stage of being able to have an informed conversation about that. And I think we have to, when we are giving away our civil liberties, all of our liberties, including privacy, we have to be informed about what we are giving away and what we are getting in return. And I haven’t seen anything like that quality of conversation happen yet. Juergen, I can see you want to come in. Yeah. Imean... First of all, we absolutely need this technology. We need this app and we need to be able to track and trace. This has been the strategy in countries that have managed this very successfully, in South Korea, for example. and andl and I think specifically to the point of data, you know, this needs absolute trust and transparency. I think everybody needs to understand exactly what the data is going to be used for, which is only for this purpose of tracking and tracing, and with that making sure we can save with that making sure we ran save lives. with that making sure we can save lives. That’s what it’s about. And absolute trust the data will not be used for any other commercial purpose. One final point I would like to make, what I am a bit surprised about is that we are not learning from countries that are further ahead of this, they’ve further ahead of this, therve already further ahead of this, they’ve already resolved some of these problems, they’ve resolved some of problems, therve resolved some of the privacy problems, they’ve resolved some of the privacy issues. And we do seem to be going down a the tother go it alone strategy here, and I would suggest, let’s do our trials on the Isla of Wight, suggest, let’s do our trials on the Isle of Wight, but it might be a Isla of Wight, but it might be a good idea to Isle of Wight, but it might be a good idea to back another horse which is the app that has been developed in Korea, the one developed in Europe by Google and Apple so we have two horses so we ran get one of Apple so we have two horses so we can get one of them to work very ran get one of them to work very quickly, can get one of them to work very quickly, because we need to. Do you think we should be doing that, Nick? The owner, we are in favour of using test, track and trace, and we have been arguing for a strategy on this for some considerable time now —— for some considerabla time now -- the for some considerable time now -- the owner, we for some considerable time now —— the owner, we are in favour. I think the app is very much part of that, an essential tool as we look at that tracing strategy now going forward. It is also true to say, though, that It is also tme to say, though, that it is It is also two to say, though, that it is going to It is also true to say, though, that it is going to require oversight. Cleariy it is going to require oversight. Clearly there is going to be a set Cleariy there is going to be a set of data, it is Clearly there is going to be a set of data, it is going to have to be held centrally. If you are going to pick up those different parts of the country where there are outbreaks. I think we need to be clear that is being protected, and as has been already said, that the data is used exclusively for the purpose it is meant for which is public health emergency and not for enforcement or surveillance or commercial purposes. I do think there needs to be a Parliamentary oversight, but I think Partiamentary oversight, but I think the app itself Parliamentary oversight, but I think the app itself is going to be in a necessity going forward in order to move out of the lockdown. Fiona, I think we’re missing something quite important. Juergen spoke about the important. juergen spoke about the two important. Juergen spoke about the two different apps and we need to understand they have different ways in which the data is held. The Googla in which the data is held. The Google Apple app deliberately has a decentralised approach and doesn’t hold all of the data in a single hold all of the data in a singla database, hold all of the data in a single database, where is the one the Government is developing at the moment does, and I do think I really intervention came about three or four weeks ago from the former director—general of MI5, Jonathan director-general of MIS, jonathan Evans, who director—general of MI5, Jonathan Evans, who said he thought it was incredibly important that we had the quality of national debate that Afua was talking about in terms of around these issues, and interestingly he pointed to exactly the same thing Nick was talking about, which is there are circumstances where you do use personal data, for example fighting crime and preventing terrorism, but there are some really strict parliamentary oversight procedures to ensure that that data is being held properly. The app will is being held property. The app will only work if is being held properly. The app will only work if we can get 50—60%, 70% only work if we ran get 50-6096, 7096 of the people only work if we can get 50—60%, 70% of the people to use it. I think of the peopla to use it. I think peopla of the people to use it. I think people need to be confident they can people need to be confident they ran tmst it, and people need to be confident they can trust it, and therefore what is really important is that that oversight should be put in place and peopla will oversight should be put in place and people will know that the data they peopla will know that the data they are going to people will know that the data they are going to provide is not going to be misused. One advantage with the NHS app is that people can trust it, it’s part that peopla ran trust it, it’s part of the NHS, that people can trust it, it’s part of the NHS, but gives better information about where you might get [oral information about where you might get local flare—ups so we can get [oral ﬂare-ups so we ran respond to get local flare—ups so we can respond to that and monitor local or respond to that and monitor [oral or regional respond to that and monitor local or regional pick—ups in the virus. We regional pick-ups in the vims. We have had a regional pick—ups in the virus. We have had a number of comments, and this one says, is it really safe using Bluetooth? Can criminals take using Bluetooth? (“an criminals take personal info using Bluetooth? Can criminals take personal info from your phone? Will personal info from your phone? will it only work personal info from your phone? Will it only work with honesty from the user? You have to report you have symptoms. will user? You have to report you have symptoms. Will it be any use? You symptoms. will it be any use? You need a symptoms. Will it be any use? You need a significant take up to get the information you want from it. james, what the information you want from it. James, what do you think of what you james, what do you think of what you have James, what do you think of what you have heard? Yeah can mention South have heard? Yeah ran mention South Korea, and have heard? Yeah can mention South Korea, and the reading I’ve been doing about South Korea as they not only use track and trace but also some of the data that is freely available, information from the GPS availabla, information from the GPS system, CCTV available, information from the GPS system, CCTV system and also as well from credit card spending and things like that, as I said during the we need to give the tracers as much information as possible and just information as possibla and just look at information as possible and just look at the sacrifice we have all made that we need really to trust the tracers to be able to meet that target, to get this virus. 70 to 90% target, to get this vims. 70 to 9096 of the peopla target, to get this virus. 70 to 90% of the people have been in contact within the last two weeks. If we don’t do that, we could have another ﬂare-up. So don’t do that, we could have another ﬂare-up. Sol don’t do that, we could have another flare—up. So I think the privacy ﬂare-up. So I think the privacy issue has flare—up. So I think the privacy issue has to ﬂare-up. So I think the privacy issue has to go flare—up. So I think the privacy issue has to go out of the window, and we have to say this is what it is, and we’ve got to use all the available technology and data to make sure that we can crack this make sure that we ran crack this virus, and make sure that we can crack this virus, and let’s start living again, because we’ve all made too many sacrifices, and we are trying to get out of lockdown to save the economy and jobs. It sounds like you’re desperate to get out of the house, and you will not be alone in that! George, the governor has said it wants to recruit 18,000 four contact wants to recmit18,000 four contact tracing. How wants to recruit 18,000 four contact tracing. How many have been recruited so far? At 5000 so far, so that’s being built. As we try and evolve the policy and move out of lockdown and trying to get back to life as normal, 3 track and trace life as normal, a track and trace system along life as normal, 3 track and trace system along these lines will be a critical tool. system along these lines will be a criticaltool. Lets system along these lines will be a critical tool. Lets take a question from Saskia Jennings. Do you think from Saskia jennings. Do you think it’s from Saskia Jennings. Do you think it’s appropriate to ease a lockdown in all areas of the country at the same time even though the effects of the virus have not been evenly distributed? The north—east, we have distributed? The north-east, we have seen high death distributed? The north—east, we have seen high death rates in towns like Middlesbrough and Sunderland and I Middlesbrough and Sundertand and I don’t Middlesbrough and Sunderland and I don’t know if they should be managed like other areas of the country like the south—west. At Nicola Sturgeon the south-west. At Nicola Sturgeon today was the south—west. At Nicola Sturgeon today was talking about is Scotland and saying she doesn’t see any easing of lockdown anytime soon. Nick, what do you think? What is the Nick, what do you think? what is the labour Nick, what do you think? What is the Labour view about is in the lockdown labour view about is in the lockdown differently in Labour view about is in the lockdown differently in different areas depending on the infection rate, the number of cases and so on? Well, I sit number of rases and so on? Well, I sit here in number of cases and so on? Well, I sit here in Wales, Fiona, and there have been moments in the crisis where Wales has taken a slightly different decisions. For example, the guidelines are slightly different but, on the whole, the Welsh government, has tried to take a four nations approach, and I think that has been a sensible way to proceed because we do all shared these islands and, for example, my own constituency, I would in ordinary circumstances have people ordinary circumstances have peopla who ordinary circumstances have people who commuted to work, but a different situation at the moment, but ordinarily they would commute over the border into Bristol, so it gets very difficult if you have things which are very different in different parts of the country. The only point I would make in relation to that is that we just talked about the contact tracing app. Clearly, if the contact tracing app. Clearty, if there the contact tracing app. Clearly, if there were to be after these lockdown restrictions start to ease a particular area where the tracing aPP a particular area where the tracing app showed that there was a specific problem, then clearly you might have problam, then dearty you might have to look at problem, then clearly you might have to look at that specific area so, whilst I accept there will be variations, and they have already been variations, I think we should try and go for the four visions approach that the Welsh government has been doing as much as possible. But also ensure that, as the Prime Minister moves forward, he to be setting out a road map on Sunday, that he works with the devolved institutions in order to get that consensus across the country, because I think that is so important. Chris, can you see from important. Chris, ran you see from the perspective important. Chris, can you see from the perspective of NHS workers that you represent, is there an ottoman, do you think? The government has said it is too soon at the moment, and the Prime Minister has made that clear, but reintroducing the lockdown in certain areas depending on what is happening, but can you on what is happening, but ran you see an on what is happening, but can you see an argument, as Saskia says, for easing the lockdown differently as we go along? There is a real dilemma here because one striking thing, talking to trust chief executives, is the degree to which this has varied very much. We talk to trust executives in London, it’s been really difficult. In the south—west, really difficult. In the south-west, actually, they really difficult. In the south—west, actually, they have been saying that relatively speaking it’s been... relatively speaking it’s been. . . They haven’t relatively speaking it’s been... They haven’t experienced the level of demand they were expecting the step but the bit we are missing, which feels really important to me, is one of the things about lockdown has been the consistency of the national communications. We need to be clear about what it is that we are meant to be doing and not. Do you think it’s been inconsistent? My argument would be, if we try and have different areas doing different things, it’s already complicated enough as far as I’m concerned in terms of what you are meant to be doing and not doing, that that it seems to me is a very strong argument to seems to me is a very strong argument tojust be seems to me is a very strong argument to just be careful about argument tojust be careful about splitting the argument to just be careful about splitting the country into different places trying to do different things. Thank Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can do it differently. Clearly, the default nations is issues, but all I say is that you have this tension because if you were just doing it on the basis of where you had prevalence, the first peak torque is clearly the first peak torque is dearty that the first peak torque is clearly that actually you are getting very different spread in different areas. What strikes me about the question, what strikes me about the question, not the What strikes me about the question, not the direct question, but Saskia talks about easing the restrictions and, given the figures today about the death rate amongst black and Asian minority ethnic people being twice that once you take into account numerous factors, twice that of white people, in terms of their of white peopla, in terms of their risk, does of white people, in terms of their risk, does that in any sense affect either protective measures or lockdown, do you think? We have regional disparities and a remarkable disparity in ethnicity remarkabla disparity in ethnicity and, as you remarkable disparity in ethnicity and, as you said, today, figures show that, if you are a black man in this country, you are four times more likely to die. And, if you account for socio— economic factors account for socio- economic factors like account for socio— economic factors like self—reported health conditions, poverty, they are still twice as likely to die. This has not been explained. Some of us from the beginning, from the first anecdotal evidence, have been asking for a concerted effort to understand why certain ethnic groups appear to be so much more at risk. There is an enquiry going on. Custom and there is more data emerging. I have major issues with the government enquiry and its failure to gain trust among the affected communities so far. But my issue is this, really. If we are to start easing restrictions, measures will be taken when people measures will be taken when peopla return to measures will be taken when people return to work to protect them? I have heard the NHS has told employers in the NHS to take necessary measures to protect ethnic minority staff in light of the data, but there has been no consistent message about what employers should do, knowing that their ethnic minority staff are more likely to die, to remove them from front—line die, to remove them from front-line duties and put die, to remove them from front—line duties and put extra precautionary measures in place not doing that is active neglect. That applies to the workforce in general. I am not confident there has been clear messaging from the government about what employers should do to keep their workers safe if we start returning to work. There are non-binding returning to work. There are non—binding guidelines and ideas, non-binding guidelines and ideas, but non—binding guidelines and ideas, but there is nothing to say, this categorically must happen to protect workers. I think we may get to that a bit further down the programme George, there is Saskia’s question about whether it’s appropriate to ease the lockdown differently in different areas and what Afua was saying in terms of protecting ethnic minorities. On the first point, as Chris said, I think it’s preferable to try and have a single approach to try and have a singla approach because to try and have a single approach because otherwise it gets confusing. And some of the advice from the Chief Medical Officer is that, although the prevalence can be different in different parts of the country, the so—called R rate is country, the so-ralled R rate is quite similar country, the so—called R rate is quite similar across the country, so the argument for having very different approaches probably isn’t very strong. But there are parts of the country that have a lot of tourism, so there are issues about how we exit lockdown which sectors of the economy to try and tentatively open and at which stage, and these are factors that will be taken into account in that context. Much the lockdown be lifted slightly more in places like Cornwall and Devon? The Prime Minister will give his statement on Sunday. The key thing is... Is that what you expect? Everybody has to observe the current restrictions but I think the Prime Minister has already signalled that Minister has already signallad that what Minister has already signalled that what he is likely to outline on Sunday is, if you like, a route map Sunday is, ifyou like, a route map about how Sunday is, if you like, a route map about how we can evolve this policy about how we ran evolve this policy for we about how we can evolve this policy for we will be very cautious because we are dearty for we will be very cautious because we are clearly not out of the woods we are dearty not out of the woods on this by any we are clearly not out of the woods on this by any means. But I think we are expecting a bit more than a route map. He said, the reason we are making the announcement on Sunday so we can get going with some Sunday so we ran get going with some of the Sunday so we can get going with some of the measures on Monday, so from what he said something will happen on Monday. Some things might happen, but we will be very cautious about what happens and what timetable. what happens and what timetabla. This is what happens and what timetable. This is not going to be a single announcement that that is the end of the lockdown and everything is back to normal. I don’t think anybody expects that. We will have to live with this virus for some time and that means we will have to have a gradual approach to loosening some of these restrictions. Juergen of these restrictions. juergen Maier, of these restrictions. Juergen Maier, Saskia is asking about a different way of easing restrictions depending on where you live. I am with Nick on this. We went in it together, messaging wasn’t quite clear enough and as we come out I think we have to be together to help simplify the messaging. That doesn’t mean that we can’t then have different interventions in different parts of the country, so the rules parts of the country, so the mles are the parts of the country, so the rules are the same for everybody but, if in Newcastle, which was the example that was used, you have a flare—up, that was used, you have a ﬂare-up, then that is that was used, you have a flare—up, then that is where you move more testing capacity, that is where you move more of the track and tracers, and I think also in terms of what Afua was saying, we also need to say there is evidence that clearly black there is evidence that dearty black men are there is evidence that clearly black men are unfortunately more vulnerable in this situation, so we need to be much more supportive to black men and make testing available to black men and make sure we have got those earty to black men and make sure we have got those early interventions, got those earty interventions, certainly got those early interventions, certainly until we get to the point where we have got more science to understand why this is happening. I’d like to add, black men have the most serious disparity, but many ethnic groups, could block of Pakistani heritage, Bangladeshi heritage, black and Asian women are more likely to die from Covid, so there is quite a wide number of different ethnic minority communities whose lives are at stake, so it couldn’t be more serious. I stake, so it couldn’t be more serious. Ifeel there was stake, so it couldn’t be more serious. I feel there was a real lack of intellectual curiosity from lack of intellactual curiosity from the lack of intellectual curiosity from the government about why this was happening to stop it took a concerted and consistent effort from campaigners and journalists like me falling campaigners and journalists like me calling upon the covenant to take this seriously and it was weeks before we had any interests, let alone an enquiry, and I before we had any interests, let alone an enquiry, and Ifeel eyes alone an enquiry, and I feel eyes could alone an enquiry, and Ifeel eyes could have been saved if this was taken seriously at an earlier stage. taken seriously at an eartier stage. This isn’t taken seriously at an earlier stage. This isn’t true, is a new virus and we are learning new things all the time for the Matt Hancock set up a review to look at these issues, and it isn’t just BME review to look at these issues, and it isn’tjust BME communities where it isn’t just BME communities where there it isn’tjust BME communities where there seems to be a higher incidence of the virus and more deaths, there are big links with obesity to deaths from the virus, men are more likely than women to die from the virus, so there are many other factors that need to be looked at. Let’s take another question from Charles Dobson. I’m apprehensive about returning to work hot—desk king is returning to work hot-desk king is prevalent and returning to work hot—desk king is prevalent and colleagues less than two metres away. Can you outline two metres away. (“an you outline what two metres away. Can you outline what precautions the government are proposing to ensure safety at work? I am apprehensive, he says, about returning to work, where hot—desk returning to work, where hot-desk and is returning to work, where hot—desk and is prevalent and colleagues less than two metres away. Can you than two metres away. (“an you outline than two metres away. Can you outline what precautions the government are proposing to ensure safety at work? Juergen Maier, you safety at work? juergen Maier, you are not mnning safety at work? Juergen Maier, you are not running Siemens but you are are not mnning Siemens but you are involved in are not running Siemens but you are involved in other companies. What is involved in other companies. what is your view about involved in other companies. What is your view about how this should go ahead, for people like Charles? He ahead, for peopla like Charlas? He will not ahead, for people like Charles? He will not be the only one anxious about how to feel safe at work. Absolutely, and it’s such a perfect question, because there are millions of people feeling in exactly the same way, and what’s certainly needed same way, and what’s certainly neededin same way, and what’s certainly needed in the statement on Sunday and the plans we get thereafter is really, really good guidance on how safety in the workplace is going to be ensured. be ensured. There are obviously things that can be done and a lot of things that ran be done and a lot of the economy things that can be done and a lot of the economy and it is working today. The retail sector is working, transport sectors are working. So we learn from transport sectors are working. 50 we learn from those, and we make sure we are putting the absolute right measures in place. You mention the example of hot testing. I think one of the rules in offices will be that of the mles in offices will be that what testing of the rules in offices will be that what testing is not allowed, because that is obviously the sharing of equipment, or certainly, you know, there would have to be a lot of sanitising in between, but these guidelines are going to have to be crystal clear so we get a huge amount of confidence, and there also needs to be some policing of that. And every company knows how to do risk assessments to keep people safe at work, and I think the same rules at work, and I think the same mles apply here and at work, and I think the same rules apply here and we have a Health and Safety Executive that can help enforced at and make sure they are working together with businesses and we are creating the right safe working environment. Nick, do you think the guidelines, sorry, not guidelines, but the provisions put in place for employees should be legally binding? Well, I don’t think lagally binding? Well, I don’t think the legally binding? Well, I don’t think the guidelines that have been suggested so far are sufficiently precise and I think you absolutely need better enforcement. But we’ve been arguing for a national safety standard, and we are putting that together with employers, with the TUC, and of course across political parties so everybody can have confidence, whether employers, employees, everybody in the workplace, they can be sure going workplace, they ran be sure going back to workplace, they can be sure going back to work. I think there needs to be, yes, a recognition that workplaces are different. But we need to be risk assessing our workplaces, we need to be looking at distancing, weather screens, supplying the appropriate personal equipment, and then along supplying the appropriate personal equipment, and then alongside supplying the appropriate personal equipment, and then along side that we absolutely need an enforcement mechanism, and quite rightly we absolutely need an enforcement mechanism, and quite rightlyJuergen mechanism, and quite rightly juergen mention mechanism, and quite rightlyJuergen mention the Health and Safety Executive and there are local authorities as well of course but what we really need is sufficient resource available for that enforcement to take place. If that is the use, enforcement to take place. If that is the case, then we can have confidence going forward that people confidence going forward that peopla do feel confidence going forward that people do feel safe going to work, and employers as well feel certain about what they are required to do. On that subject, we have had a tweet in from [aura that subject, we have had a tweet in from Laura Herod. If and when the from [aura Herod. If and when the schools from Laura Herod. If and when the schools return, obviously teachers are key employees as well, will teachers be expected to wear PPE? Act delete my Nick was referring to PPE. Afua? I Act delete my Nick was referring to PPE. Afua? Ithink Act delete my Nick was referring to PPE. Afua? I think this is where trust comes trust comes in —— and Nick was trust comes in -- and Nick was referring to PPE. trust comes in —— and Nick was referring to PPE. I have seen unions, workers groups, already voicing quite extreme concern about whether they will be protected when they return to work. Amidst this we have the spectre of the people on the front line not being properly the front line not being property protected the front line not being properly protected so there is a real sense that people’s lives are being put unnecessarily at risk, and I’m as keen as everybody else to be able to get back to some semblance of normality, for my daughter to return to school, but on the other hand I think we do need those assurances that we will be kept safe and I think they need to be crystal clear, as juergen think they need to be crystal clear, asJuergen said, really important as juergen said, really important phrase. But asJuergen said, really important phrase. But also they need to be binding because we know there are employers who will float good employers who will ﬂoat good practice employers who will float good practice and we know we don’t have a perfect record of safety at work, so this is the time for those standards to be increased and heightened and made crystal clear and not to be optional. We have had another comment in on workplace guidance on coronavims, comment in on workplace guidance on coronavirus, should they be legally coronavims, should they be lagally binding or coronavirus, should they be legally binding or optional extras? I think we need to be careful about making the assumption it is all on the guidelines. Can I share my dilemma guidelines. (“an I share my dilamma as guidelines. (“an I share my dilemma as the guidelines. Can I share my dilemma as the chief executive of an organisations? We only have 60 staff, but our office is really quite difficult because we have a really narrow corridor which effectively enables people to get to and from their desk. There is no way we will be able to observe social distancing... Or have a one—way distancing... Or have a one-way system. Yeah, distancing... Or have a one—way system. Yeah, you can have all the system. Yeah, you ran have all the guidelines you system. Yeah, you can have all the guidelines you like, but what actually you also need is you need leaders of organisations who think that the welfare of their staff is by far the most important thing, and certainly that is the way we act as our senior leadership team in our organisation, but also need the ingenuity of staff to help you do things like work out how would you create a one—way system... Do you create a one-way system... Do you think create a one—way system... Do you think these things, because obviously you are talking about the peopla in obviously you are talking about the people in your office, but when it peopla in your office, but when it comes to Andy people in your office, but when it comes to Andy Lynch workers, community trust, hospital workers, your obviously here is the face of that -- your obviously here is the face of that —— when it comes to ambulance that -- when it comes to ambulance workers. Do you that —— when it comes to ambulance workers. Do you think these protections for workers should be lagally protections for workers should be legally binding, as has been suggested, or legally binding, as has been suggested, oras legally binding, as has been suggested, or as optional extras? legally binding, as has been suggested, oras optional extras? I suggested, or as optional extras? I don’t suggested, oras optional extras? I don’t think they should be optional extras. I think we should absolutely ensure that leader limit are held to appropriate account for creating safe workplaces. To be frank, that is what existing health and safety lagislation is what existing health and safety legislation does. 50 that is legally lagislation does. So that is lagally binding? It legislation does. 50 that is legally binding? It is, and what we also know is life is now becoming really complex. I spoke to a hospital chief exec the other day who literally had to divide their hospital into a Covid—19 zone and a non—Covid—19 Covid-19 zone and a non-Covid-19 zone and Covid—19 zone and a non—Covid—19 zone and that has created some really complicated issues. The classic example is we are all saying, quite rightly, let’s restart all the elective surgery, for example, but that particular hospital will lose quite a lot of its capacity because effectively it has to divide that hospital into a safe Covid—19 zone a safe non—Covid safe Covid-19 zone a safe non-Covid zone, so there safe Covid—19 zone a safe non—Covid zone, so there are those challenges for people to provide the proper environment for their staff. for people to provide the proper environment fortheirstaff. I for people to provide the proper environment for their staff. I met when you hear about Charles filling “P when you hear about Charles filling up a rent to work on a hot desk in, colleagues less than two metres away, as far as your concern should someone like Charles be able to say without fear of being laid off, it’s not safe enough? "It’s not adhering to best practice? I’m not going to come in? Close but is why we have been working with working with employers, with unions, over the last two weeks, in the Government, __ yes, last two weeks, in the Government, -- yes, that is last two weeks, in the Government, —— yes, that is why we have been -- yes, that is why we have been working with. It is —— yes, that is why we have been working with. It is important to note there are sectors of the economy that never shut down. The food industry for which I am responsible, people go to acid responsible, peopla go to acid outlat responsible, people go to acid outlet and will see Dot might also outlat and will see Dot might also food outlet and will see Dot might also food manufacturers, bread manufacturers, dairies and so on, —— manufacturers, dairies and so on, -- and they will see manufacturers, dairies and so on, —— and they will see food manufacturers. When I talk to those businesses their level of absence due to people self isolating through coronavirus has fallen from a peak of 20% at the very beginning of this of 2096 at the very beginning of this episode of 20% at the very beginning of this episode about five weeks ago down to about between 3—6% which is actually about between 3-696 which is actually quite close to about between 3—6% which is actually quite close to normal level. But quite close to normal lavel. But coming to quite close to normal level. But coming to Charles’s question, coming to Charlas’s question, though, ran coming to Charles’s question, though, can you outline what though, ran you outline what precautions though, can you outline what precautions the Government is proposing to ensure safety at work? How ran you proposing to ensure safety at work? How can you make someone like How ran you make someone like Charles How can you make someone like Charles feel safe? Are you going to make it legally binding? As the TUC make it lagally binding? As the TUC was make it legally binding? As the TUC was suggesting you should. Or is it just going to be something you expect companies to go along with? Look, the difficulty of being too prescriptive is that different businesses will have different approaches and so for instance in the retail sector we discovered a small convenience store might have a very different approach to a large supermarket, and the practicalities of doing things are different and large supermarkets for instance might restrict cars going on at the might restrict tars going on at the entrance, might restrict cars going on at the entrance, and obviously a small corner shop will take a different approach. You need to have enough ﬂexibility for approach. You need to have enough flexibility for employers to be able ﬂexibility for employers to be able to do flexibility for employers to be able to do what works in their environment. I think in the office environment he cited with hot desk and, I environment he cited with hot desk and, Ithink environment he cited with hot desk and, I think the reality is there will still be a strong encouragement of businesses that are office—based of businesses that are office-based to of businesses that are office—based to enable people still to work from to enabla peopla still to work from home as to enable people still to work from home as far as possible, so that actually you don’t have high densities of people crowded into those office environments using shared equipment. My issue here, I feel we need a bit of reality. There will be lots of responsible employers. There already are, doing the kinds of thinking you’re doing, taking the right steps and really investing and caring about protecting their workforce, but there will always be employers who are not responsible and willing to put their workers at risk, and these conversations are designed to protect people who work for the protect peopla who work for the worst protect people who work for the worst case scenario business and worst rase scenario business and that’s why we worst case scenario business and that’s why we need stringent measures that are not optional because otherwise people who are vulnerable who are too insecure to be able to challenge safety at work or too dependent on zero hours or other insecure contracts to opt out of working won’t be protected. 50 we of working won’t be protected. So we have to be of working won’t be protected. 50 we have to be thinking about the of working won’t be protected. So we have to be thinking about the worst case scenario, not the best case rase scenario, not the best rase scenario. case scenario, not the best case scenario. What are your thoughts? scenario. what are your thoughts? That is scenario. What are your thoughts? That is not Eric’s parents, dealing with the business. There are large companies and small companies do everybody takes this very seriously. -- that is everybody takes this very seriously. —— that is not our experience. -- that is not our experience. Employers —— that is not our experience. Employers their employees very fiercely. The reason the Health and Safety Executive exist is because there are people that don’t take it easily. Are you suggesting they all miraculously well now? The Health and Safety Executive have been involved in guidance with food companies, as has Public Health England, and the Food Standards Agency as well. All of those agencies have been working and contributing to the guidance businesses are following. Like Mike but are you anticipating... Sorry, juergen. The but are you anticipating... Sorry, Juergen. The point, Fiona, there is juergen. The point, Fiona, there is an existing Juergen. The point, Fiona, there is an existing process. Every director of an an existing process. Every director of an Of a company, they know their responsibility in keeping their employees say. That is crystal clear and you have to do that at any time. We are now adding living and working with Covid as a requirement to keep safe. We get some guidelines around that. I totally agree with Afua, most employers will do that because they take it seriously, and quite frankly they don’t they shouldn’t be in business, safety comes number one. And the Health and Safety Executive will enforce the few that don’t come and it is a few. In addition to many, in my experience. George, from where you are sitting in Government, do you think it’s going to be difficult to get peopla think it’s going to be difficult to get people back to work? Obviously get peopla back to work? Obviously peopla are get people back to work? Obviously people are desperate to start earning again and all of that, but they are anxious as well. There will be some apprehension, of course, and that’s why we have been working on this guidance. Coming back to my experience in the sector where they had high absentee levels of about 20% at the beginning, and it is 2096 at the beginning, and it is right now 20% at the beginning, and it is right now down to about four or 5%, right now down to about four or 596, which isn’t right now down to about four or 5%, which isn’t much different to normal, so what people discovered is once those social distancing measures were put in place staff returned to work, some of them returned from being in isolation, some of them return because perhaps they were anxious but had learned that actually these measures had been put in place that reassure them. But we will all have different complications, won’t we? We work in the centre of London and when we have been talking to our staff about beginning to think about what might happen, quite rightly, one of the things they immediately raise, what’s it going to be like travelling to work into central London and actually being on a packed Tube train next to people who might present a safety risk? I think one of the issues the Government faces is this is quite multifaceted, it’s not... George talks about the food industry because he is responsible for that but we also need to ensure transport is appropriately configured, so this is quite a complex picture if we are actually going to be able to encourage people, and enable and encourage peopla, and enabla and support encourage people, and enable and support them, to come back to work. We have the example of other countries ahead of first night we ran countries ahead of first night we can follow. Which is helpful, we can ran follow. which is helpful, we ran learn from can follow. Which is helpful, we can learn from that. I have to say our hour is up and lots of questions, sorry I didn’t get round them. Margaret and James, you asked Margaret and james, you asked questions Margaret and James, you asked questions at the beginning and you satin and listen so thanks very much for your patience and questions at the beginning. We were hoping to get more of you at home to take part in the programme live. If you think you would be up for that let us know and of course you ran would be up for that let us know and of course you can prerecord your of course you ran prerecord your question but I of course you can prerecord your question but I am keen to get as much of that in as I can. Let us much of that in as I ran. Let us know in the much of that in as I can. Let us know in the usual way the question time website. And if you want to marry on time website. And if you want to carry on the discussion we have been having this evening, ask questions, carry on the discussion we have been having this evening, ask questions, get more of your comments across, you ran get more of your comments across, you ranjoin get more of your comments across, you canjoin guest on Extra Time on you ranjoin guest on Extra Time on five live you canjoin guest on Extra Time on five live now. But to Margaret and james, to Nick five live now. But to Margaret and James, to Nick and Juergen, for james, to Nick and juergen, for joining down James, to Nick and Juergen, for joining down the line, a little peek into your homes, not enough for my liking, but thank you, and of course to George, Chris and Afua for joining in the studio, and to you for watching Question Time, goodbye.