Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Michelle Donelan, an MP since 2015, On tonight’s panel, Michelle Donelan, an MP since 2015, following a career in marketing, currently the Government’s Minister for Universities. Labour’s Shadow Minister for Policing and the Fire Service, previously Shadow Housing Minister, Sarahjones. Joining us down the line, immunologist and Professor of Experimental Medicine at Imperial College, and a member of Nervtag, the Government’s advisory group on respiratory viruses, Peter Openshaw. Liam Halligan, economist, Telegraph columnist, and author of books on housing and Brexit. And Michelin—starred chef, restauranteur and presenter of TV programmes on weight loss, and The Great British Pub, Tom Kerridge. APPLAUSE Good evening. Welcome to my guests here in the studio and to Peter who isjoining us down the line, and to our audience who is coming virtually tonight, as it always is at the moment, from Bath and around Bath. Very good to see you. And thank you, all of you, for watching at home. And thank you, all of you, for watching at home. If you want to join the conversation, you can come in the usual way, on social media, @bbcquestiontime. Let’s kick off with their first question tonight, which is from Colleen Bower. Hello there. Scientists and regulators have done an amazing job getting the Pfizer vaccine developed, approved and off the starting blocks. Will they and the public now be let down at the final hurdle by our logistics capabilities? Sarah? Well, it’s a good question, and I think that’s the question everyone is asking at the moment. It’s fantastic news that we’ve got the vaccine, and it really is a moment to be proud, to be proud of all the scientists across the world that are working on all these vaccines, and to have that light at the end of the tunnel. When you’re putting up your Christmas decorations, you can think, "There will be an end to this," because there you can think, "There will be an end to this," because there is a vaccine coming. It’s brilliant. But we know, and the scientists have been really clear, But we know, and the scientists have been really clear, in the press conference with the Prime Minister yesterday in the press conference with the Prime Minister yesterday and all through the day to day, this is going to be very challenging logistically. Firstly, how is it going to be delivered, and to whom? Of course there are tears of people that are going to get it first. —— Of course there are tiers of people that are going to get it first. But I don’t know about you, but my MP WhatsApp groups have been buzzing all day with people saying, "Well, we’ve heard there’s going to be a hospital here doing it and a hospital they are, but what about our area?" Everyone is worrying about that. We worry about care homes, of course we do, because we know that, you know, there are logistical issues with this particular vaccine in terms of the temperature it needs to be. Are we going to make sure we can get to those care homes properly? And then I think there is also a challenge with public health and making sure people know that they can trust this vaccine and that they should use it. You know, we’re not measles—free in this country any more. We were. We’re not any more, because people haven’t trusted the vaccine, so we need a really good public health message. But I think, you know, this is a really big challenge. The Government haven’t got it right on things like test and trace. They have to get it right now, because there are people’s lives on the line, and we can’t get this wrong again. on the line, and we can’t get this wrong again. Liam? Well, vaccines of course mark a major advance in human achievement since the Enlightenment, into the 19th century, since the Enlightenment, into the 19th century, and Britain’s been at the forefront of those achievements over and Britain’s been at the forefront of those achievements over the years and decades. But this isn’t the time for vaccine nationalism, and I agree we should congratulate the scientists, the Pfizer scientists in Belgium, the Moderna scientists in the States, you know, British scientists working in international teams here in the UK with AstraZeneca. But what about the logistical capabilities? That’s what Colleen was asking about. The logistical capabilities are obviously forefront now, now we’ve got a vaccine that’s been approved, and I am reassured that the British Army are going to be involved. Their absolute world expert clinic at rolling out things, —— They’re absolute world experts at rolling out things, complex capabilities. This is probably going to be the biggest logistical exercise that our Armed Forces have undertaken since the Falklands War, which I’m old enough to remember, just about. So let’s hope so. As a neutral, I’d like to see a lot of cross—party cooperation, and I’m encouraged with Sarah’s tone there. I think everybody wants to see us alljust getting on with this now. We don’t want to see, you know, competition between countries on whose vaccine is best. There will be some instances where the Pfizer vaccine works better. There will be other instances, for instance, where you can’t have a very, very cold refrigeration, and maybe across the developing world as well, a cheaper vaccine like the AstraZeneca Oxford vaccine works better. Let’s just keep our fingers crossed and hope that we make a good job of this. Colleen, you ask the question. What prompted you to ask this? Is this because you’ve got concerns, or what’s behind it? Well, we haven’t really covered ourselves in glory so far at any logistical exercise. I mean, with the PPE, test and trace, any of the things that have had to be done to do with Covid. So, yes, I have got concerns, and I also think that maybe the Government should be managing expectations better. They seem to come out and say, "Everything’s going to be done by springtime." I think that’s highly unlikely, given the record. And I don’t know that a lot has been gained by suggesting that. It’ll be great if the military is involved, and I think it would be much better if the military was involved in the command and control, rather thanjust the delivery side, and I hope that that will maybe he the case. 50, Michelle, are we going to be let down by logistics capabilities? No, I think, to Colleen’s point, I can totally understand why people are concerned and nervous at this stage, because we’ve got this far and it’s good news. But we’ve made it very clear as a Government this is a massive logistical challenge, but one that our massive NHS is up to. This is the same NHS that’s got us through this pandemic, the fantastic people, including in my own constituency, that work tirelessly to support us. We have a plan, we’re going to do this, we’re going to do it together, but this isn’t going to happen overnight and we need to be very realistic about that. To be successful, we need to green light other vaccinations. This is just the first one. It also depends on the manufacturer of these vaccinations, which to an extent is slightly out of our control as well. So this is going to be a long process. And hope and help is here, but we’ve certainly got a long way to go. Can I just ask you, because the Government and Jonathan Van—Tam have been saying today the aim is to get it to care homes first, but there are difficulties with this particular Pfizer vaccine because it has to be stored at such an incredibly cold temperature, so it’s not going to get to care homes first, but in Scotland the Scottish Health Secretary says care homes will have the vaccine taken to them from the 14th of December, so what is it that they’re able to do that we’re not able to do? So, from my understanding, it’s also that you can’t break up the number of vaccines together... No, no, why are they able... So it is also about... Why are they able to do it and we’re not able to do it? It’s also about breaking them up and that needs the MHRA approval to be able to do that so you’re not wasting vaccines. So if you were taking 600... Yes, but that’s true for the Scottish Government as well. So is it that what they are saying is not right, or can they do something that we can’t do? I think that that approval is potentially forthcoming, so that might... I can’t speak to the exact comment. It may be that they are banking on that approval coming. We’ve said throughout, for a number of weeks now, that our priority is care homes and making sure we get that vaccination in there as quickly as possible. We’ve got to do that and we will be doing it as soon as we can. Peter, in terms of the logistics capabilities — it’s obviously a fantastic breakthrough to have a vaccine, let alone a number of vaccines, coming down the pipeline. In terms of getting it out to people, how confident are you about that? Yeah, so this is clearly a tremendous triumph of science that we’ve managed to get this far. I think we are up to the logistic challenge, and that’s because we have a superb system in the NHS that can deliver vaccines at scale, and we have tremendous networks which are already present throughout the country. I don’t think we need to put in a whole new command and control system in order to do this because we do have the people already up for this particular challenge. I mean, I think the problem about breaking up the batches and getting them out into care homes is a very important one. We know that the best way to deliver vaccines is at the point where people are actually assembled in workplaces, schools and so on. We always know that that’s the best way to do it. So I think we must find ways of getting round the logistical problems which are because of having only four stages that you’re allowed, by the regulations, to stage this vaccine as it comes from the factory into the delivery points. But I think that is surmountable. Itjust needs a little bit of work. Tom? From my point of view, I mean it’s been a magical couple of days, you know, the news that’s coming through, it feels that there is an end to this nightmare that we’ve all been living, feeling that... However, you know, the short term excitement about it, long term there are those problems of getting everybody vaccinated to make sure that we can get our lives back to normal and running in that space. I mean, yes, we have a poor track record of how we’ve dealt with coronavirus, I have to be honest. As you sit there and somebody from the outside, within industry, and you look at the way that... I mean, how the whole thing has been dealt with. You look at the track and trace system. It is something that we have struggled with. I mean, there have been bold claims about it and we are still struggling with it now. So I can understand people’s worry, Colleen’s point of view, "Are we going to fall into the same trap where it comes to rolling out the logistics of this?" However, I mean, logistics, it isn’t falling into that tech problem where we’re trying to get everybody to download apps and try to make the app work. It is much more of a case of being connected to human beings, manoeuvring, getting close to people, and resolving it. So, yes, I think if there are the army brought in, if there are people all over this who have an understanding of how logistics works, it isn’t the same as the track and trace system, so it does give us hope that perhaps there is something that’s coming through the other side that we will eventually get something right during this. There’s lots of hands up. Let me go around our audience. Beth? It’s obviously been a really difficult year for everyone, and I think news of this vaccine is a huge encouragement that the end is in sight, But also it’s a very specific vaccine in that it has to be stored at —70 degrees C. It can’tjust be kept in the fridge like most normal ones can. And, looking at who is going to be receiving it first, care homes, other facilities that perhaps aren’t geared to catering for this type of refrigeration, that could be an additional logistical challenge. But I think, noticing the fact that we’ve managed to produce this vaccine, scientists and researchers produced vaccine within a matter of months, it’s actually a the remarkable feat, and I think the logistical side of it will be relatively easy compared to developing the vaccine in the first place. Patrick? This side of Christmas, I think the logistics of delivery might well go very well, hopefully. But, given that the majority of the vaccines have to come from overseas, there’s an unfortunate bit of timing that’s going to occur on December the 31st, and that’s Brexit of course, and I wonder whether we can expect some delay on deliveries after that date. Lawrence? Yes. No doubt, it’s absolutely brilliant news, but this is an international problem, and Bath is very much a tourism city, so I’d like to know what the follow—up to this is. As we start becoming vaccinated and the rest of the world becomes vaccinated, is there some sort of passport system that will be introduced, so that we can start travelling abroad and tourists can start travelling back into the UK that have been vaccinated? Michelle, let me ask you about that, and first of all the question from Patrick about is Brexit going to stop, or slow down, the import of the vaccine into this country. And then there is talk about an immunity passport, which was hinted at by the Vaccines Minister, Nadhim Zahawi, and then seemed to be dismissed by Michael Gove. So what we’ve said as a government on this, we’ve not got plans to introduce a passport or anything like that, of that nature. Of course businesses may look to do that in the future, but the key thing here needs to be promoting the vaccine and getting the rest of those vaccines green [it so that we can start the roll—out properly and effectively. And are you concerned that after December the 31st we might have an issue getting vaccines across as speedily as we might like? So the negotiations are going on, we know that, and they are going up to the wire, and we all appreciate that, but they are still going on, and we’ve done endless preparations? Every eventuality. 705 million into our borders, etc. So we are prepared, should that happen, either way. Peter, have you got any concerns about that, in terms of vaccines, medicines, coming across, but vaccines in particular, after December the 31st? Is that something you’ve discussed as scientists? Yeah, I desperately hope not. I mean, it would be an absolute disaster if Brexit were to cause problems with transport of medicines. Other medicines as well as vaccines. I think it highlights an issue that we’ve all been concerned about in the medical arena, that a lot of our medicines do actually come from overseas, and we need to make absolutely sure that the supply is going to be uninterrupted, and we have often quite short supply chains and not very large stocks of a lot of medications, and I think this really illustrates that problem. But I hope it will be overcome. It’s really a political problem rather than a scientific one. Well, since we’ve mentioned the Brexit word and there was a time when this programme, believe you me, when we mentioned nothing but, let’s take a question from Catherine Hodges... Has our departure from the European Union actually helped in speeding up the process to approve the vaccine? DOG BARKS. Look, even Catherine’s dog isjoining in the question, as we can hear! Michelle, just clarify where we stand with this, because we’ve had a number of things about this from various people in the Government today. Yeah, look, this is a global pandemic, it’s been a global response, and, including on this... But has leaving the European Union sped it up, as Matthew Hancock has suggested 7 So, basically, we have our own independent regulator. They have approved this. The European Union together have decided to collectively back their regulator. It wasn’t against European rules for them to have deviated, each independent state. They chose not to do that. But the important thing here is that... No, but the important thing is the question. The question is has leaving the European Union helped in speeding up the process to approve the vaccine? The Health Secretary said, "We all do the same safety checks" — he’s talking about the Europeans. "But we’ve been able to speed up how they’re done because of Brexit." Is that right? So, as I’ve said, the Europeans have collectively utilised one regulator, and we have our own regulator, and they’ve adopted different processes here. So what they’ve done, we have given them rolling results throughout... Yes, but have we been able to do it more quickly? Yes, we’ve been able to do it more quickly because they’ve accessed rolling results, they’ve tested it sequentially, and that has speeded up the process, but it hasn’t cut corners around the safety, and that is why we can be confident that this vaccine will work, it will be effective, and it won’t have those side—effects you might worry about, thinking, "Golly, this has been done so quickly." Are you concerned that because Matthew Hancock said that, and we’ve also had Gavin Williamson, the Education Secretary of course, saying, "We’ve got the very best people in this country, we’ve obviously got the best medical regulators, better than the French, better than the Belgians, we’re a much better country than every single one of them, including the US", you’ve now got the most senior medical officer in the States, Anthony Fauci, responding, saying, "The UK took the data from Pfizer and instead of scrutinising it carefully, they said, OK, let’s approve it, and that’s it", and you also had the EU kicking back as well. So, as Peter will tell you, this is approved by an independent regulator that is world renowned, so we should all have faith in this vaccination. I don’t think we should be afraid of talking up our country and the people that work in it, and absolutely amazing scientists that have worked on the process here, the regulation, getting it through on time. It is a fantastic achievement, but it is also a worldwide achievement, and we are relying on a catalogue of other vaccinations that have been produced across the globe. Peter? Yeah, I think the MHRA is one of the most respected bodies internationally. They are extraordinarily careful in the way in which they scrutinise medicines to ensure they are not only effective but also safe. And I have no concerns at all about the way in which they scrutinised the data on the Pfizer—BioNTech vaccine. I think it is very, very important that medicines are properly regulated and, you know, we do have a very proud record of it. I don’t think it’s really been affected by Brexit, because this is an emergency regulation which has gone through all the due processes, and I’d be very happy indeed to be given this vaccine tomorrow if it was offered to me. So I’m just wondering what you make of the responses that we had today from the European Union, from Anthony Fauci, for example, who clearly... Well, it suggests they feel a bit stung by what’s been said over here. I think there is unfortunate international competition being setup. You know, this is really us against the virus, it’s not us against the Americans, us against the Europeans. We all ought to be pulling together and trying to do everything we can to defeat this virus. And just speaking with one voice. And I think it’s very unfortunate indeed if we are actually trying to divide opinions on this particular matter. It’s quite clear that it’s been very, very carefully scrutinised, and I have no concerns about it. Yeah, I mean, some of the comments, it’s almost like, you know when you’re a parent and you think your kids are the best kids and the cutest kids, but you don’t go and tell all the other parents that you’ve got the best kids and the cutest kids. Itjust seems crass to say, "Oh, we’re the best country in the world — aren’t we great? oh, it’s because of Brexit, which was my policy." That’s not the point, at all, of what we’re doing here, and, you know, as it happens — I did a lot about global, a lot of work about global branding, what the world thinks of us. As it happens, the world has a good view of us in terms of our ability to make things, to get things done. If something is made in Great Britain, people will trust it round the world. We’re very high up in terms of respect for what we do and who we are. We don’t need to use crass comments and shout about it. People know that we are good at science and we’re good at what we do. But so is the rest of the world, and this is a time for all of us to celebrate what happened and to come together and not to try and, you know, make some cheap points, I think. Alex? I really do think we need to get away from this idea of vaccine nationalism. I completely agree. We all really need to be in this together. We should all be working together to get the vaccine out as quickly as we can, ensuring that it’s safe and that it’s effective, and I think that kind of... The point we made earlier, you know, that’s why I think Gavin Williamson’s comments were very, very unhelpful. You know, it wasn’t diplomatic. It’s not particularly helpful considering the Brexit negotiations, so I think, you know, the world knows that British scientists are amongst the best, but I really don’t think those comments were helpful and I think we should all be clubbing together and doing everything possible as an international community. Tom? It felt really quite toe—curlingly cringing this morning, the words that were coming out. It turned into some kind of political points scoring space race. And, I mean, how the science has worked together to make this happen has been amazing. Lots of vaccines being announced that pretty much the same time. Clearly, the scientists have been working together to create something that solves a world problem, and it’s something that we should all be so proud of, and this morning those comments that were coming out, I said it and like someone was saying, that bit where you talk about your child thinking he’s the best or whatever, and Ifound it quite embarrassing this morning, those comments. Yeah, a little toe curling. Patrick, you’ve got your hand up? Yeah, thank you. I’ve only ever been involved from the periphery with the regulatory process of medicine, but as I understand it the MHRA have run some of the phases and some of the steps in parallel with each other rather than sequentially, with some overlap between them, and that’s what short and everything. But I think the MHRA is an institution with a significant international reputation and it will stand by having done that and it willjustify not having cut any corners, so I feel quite confident in what they’ve done. Matthew T — I’ll call you Matthew T because we’ve got two Matthews in her audience. Thank you. I was wondering, instead of obviously saying crass comments, how would the panel suggest that we should collaborate with other nations better during this whole vaccine roll—out? Gosh, now that is a big question. Liam, feel free to tackle that, but let’s also look at the original question, which is has our departure from the European Union actually helped in speeding up the process to approve the vaccine? Well, the response to Catherine’s original question, I mean, people can take from this what they will, and it’s kind of depressing that we are still fighting the referendum ofJune 2016 even at this very late stage. As a point of fact, that you could have invoked emergency powers to speed up the regulatory process, but it chose not to, and if we were still part of the European Union we would be part of that collective decision. We decided to not be part of that, and that’s why, as a point of fact, we were able to approve this vaccine slightly quicker. But individual countries can take individual powers to do it individually, even within the EU. They can, in principle, but they’ve agreed between them to not do that, and we would have been part of that decision. That’s just factually accurate. That’s what it is. What I didn’t like, I mean, the European medical agency again yesterday, before Gavin Williamson’s comments — which I agree were completely crass, and if it was a joke it went badly wrong — but the European medical agency yesterday was casting aspersions on our regulatory testing regime, which the WHO has described as world class and is widely seen as world class. That’s not a nationalistic thing to say, again, it’s just a point of fact. And I think once you get into this folly of different parts of the world, politicians chest—beating, saying "Our regulations are better than your regulations", look, as people with public platforms scientists, journalists, we’ll have a big responsibility here. Quite a lot of our population, and maybe we will come onto this, Fiona, is concerned about taking this vaccine. A much smaller proportion, I’d say, well, it’s true, here in the UK than in many other countries in Europe and across the world. We don’t want to get into some Dutch auction of whose regulator is better. The fact is we did do the phase one, two and three tests here. The Chinese and Russians have got vaccines, which they are rolling out before they completed those phase three tests. And it was very good to hear from Peter some of the reasons why, and indeed from our audience, from Matthew, why it is that we’ve managed to truncate this by doing different things in parallel. Vaccines take years, but usually you’re trying to generate funding all the time, and we obviously don’t have that. I’d like to see us getting beyond this vaccine nationalism, which I think Gavin Williamson’s comments played into, and I think we’ve all had enough of this virus around the world. We want to see our leaders getting on and supporting each other, calling out regulatory slips where we can see them happening, but supporting each other when we can see the responsible regulatory bodies are doing theirjob, whoever gets there a few weeks first. 0K. I’m going to move on in a minute, but before I do I want to mention I’m going to move on in a minute, but before I do I want to mention that next week we are looking for people to join our virtual audience from Chelmsford. That is our last programme before Christmas, actually. So next week it’s from Chelmsford, and also Ijust wanted to let you know that we are introducing a new kind of audience after Christmas. 50 early next year, that is until we can get back on the road again and have an audience here in the studio like we used to, so we are looking for 50 people from across the whole of the UK to be part of a regular audience, and we will then take our audience from that pre—selected group of 50 people. So if you want to be part of that, and obviously you need to have some opinions and be free most Thursday nights, but if you want to be part of that go to the Question Time website and you can see how to apply. We love to hear from you. Do be part of that. It will be called the QT 50, so look for that on the website, the QT 50. Right, and of course in the meantime if you live around Chelmsford apply for next week. So let’s take our next programme from Matthew Batchelor. Matthew? Good evening. Why can everyone pile into town shopping centres by the thousands, but less than 100 people can’t sit at tables in pubs? Matthew, are you asking this from personal experience? Yes. You can control people in a pub because they have to sit at a table and they stay there, whereas in shopping centres they pretty much run round everywhere and do what they want. And this is because you work in a pub, do you? Yes. And are you working at the moment? No, I’m on furlough at the moment, until the 16th of December, depending on if we stay in Tier 3 or go to Tier 2. So I’m assuming, because Bath is in Tier 2, but you must just be outside, then, in 3 Tier 3 area? Just outside. Literally 200 yards, my pub is, from being in Tier 2. Right. Well, Tom, obviously I’m going to come to you first. Yeah. I mean, hospitality, like Matthew was saying there has been hugely exposed to all of this pandemic. It’s been the industry that’s been at the front line, as well as travel and tourism, aviation, all of those sort of industries have all been hit massively, but from my point of view hospitality is under a huge amount of pressure right now. We are able to open 200 yards away from Matthew, but you’re not now. All these contradictory questions. And the problem that you come across is that so many pubs, so many restaurants, hotels, have spent so much money over a period of time being able to reopen, reinvest, try to make themselves Covid secure, trying to make sure health and safety is being adhered to, risk assessments done, PPE, social distancing. So we get through that first lockdown period, where, to be fair to the Government, the furlough scheme that Matthew’s on, has been incredibly helpful from a starting point of view, but moving forward to open within the industry it does need much more help. There are pubs that are closed now losing thousands upon thousands of pounds. What would you like to see happen? Moving forward, I mean, the future, first of all we need plenty of investment. The Government has proposed a grant of, what is it, £1,000, a one—off payment to pubs that can’t serve food... Yeah, it shouts it out as A0 million, and then by the time you break that down to wet—led pubs. Wet—led pubs have been one of the worst hit in this. And just to be clear, because not everyone’s as familiar with the terminology as you, so that’s a pub that can’t... That doesn’t serve substantial meals — itjust serves mostly drinks and snacks. Mostly drinks. The community pubs, the places where people go and meet up, the people that hang out, the people... That are the centres of people’s hearts and souls, these are the pubs that are massively being hit, that don’t serve a Scotch egg. These are the places that, you know, are wet—led pubs. With a pickle on the side. So the grant that I mean, I interrupted you to just explain what the word meant, but we were talking about the grant from the Government. Yeah, so that A0 million, by the time that’s been spread out to wet led pubs, 0K, these are the places that have not had that VAT cut. So even if they have not been able to operate, their turnover figures, they haven’t got that 5096 where the Government have come in and it’s been very helpful for food and hotels and accommodation, but for these pubs they haven’t had that break. Social distancing. Those pubs make very, very small margins. I mean, there are small margins in hospitality anyway. For those pubs, it is even smaller on alcohol. There is a huge amount of taxation on it. The actual spend... Well, look, you’ve got a representative of the Government here. What would you like the Government to do? I mean, the VAT cut, it should he being pushed onto wet—led pubs, onto alcohol. The idea that the restrictions that you make, that people are not allowed to go into pubs unless they’re having something to eat, the question that Matthew’s asking about shopping centres or pubs, I mean, there is no real difference. We are all grown adults. Surely you can go out and have a drink socially rather than shopping. The idea that alcohol is driven to people’s behaviour, the way that it changes — there are plenty of people thatjust enjoy socially mixing, hanging out, under Covid—safe environments, making sure that they can be there. That VAT cut should be put onto pubs. Michelle, do you want to tackle this? Yeah, well, first of all, I’lljust say I totally agree with you. Pubs have gone above and beyond to try to get Covid—secure, and the impact on the hospitality sector has been awful. I’ve seen that in my own constituency, with countless people having to be furloughed, just like members of this audience. And the £1000, I don’t think we canjust target and focus on that, because that’s part of the bigger context. A pub that has to close at the moment also gets £3000. They got up to £25,000 in the first tranche. There is the furlough scheme, there’s also the VAT, down to 5%... Not on wet—led pubs. No, no, yes, but what I’m saying is this is part of a broader package. It won’t be applicable to all of them, but the majority is to most. So we can’tjust focus on that 1000. I think the Prime Minister was announcing that as an additional support, an additional help. And I hear what you’re saying about "Why pubs? "Why have pubs been unfairly hit or targeted?" And no politician wants to make these choices. I didn’t enter politics to close down pubs. But you could make the choice. You can make the choice to give more support to pubs. But I think that the point that was also being made was, "Why are we actually making these decisions in the first place?", and it’s fundamentally for public health and safety, directed by the science... Government Public Health England, transmission rates in hospitality was at 3%. That’s right. Between 3% and 5% within hospitality. And 10% of the workforce, hospitality... Hospitality also employs over 3 million people. It’s sat there, and we saw the Eat Out To Help Out scheme, places where the infection rate did not rise then. The infection rate rises came when students were moving up and down the country... I don’t think we should blame students. I’m not blaming students, I’m blaming movement of people. The students aren’t to blame. If the movement of people. 0K. We’ve got Peter. Peter, do you want to pitch in here, since you’re clearly the man who is looking at this evidence, as a scientist? So I think it’s very clear that there are things that transmit the virus really well, and that’s often in venues where there is poor ventilation, loud music, and people have to shout to overcome the noise, and then you are emitting a lot of snifﬂe particles which contain a lot of the virus, so that’s a perfect transmission environment. If you have a quiet environment with well—ventilated areas and where you can actually have social separation, and there are lots of very well—managed places where you can go and have a meal and so on and drink a pint at the same time, where the transmission risk is very, very low. But I think it has been clear that loud music and shouting in an enclosed environment is perfect for transmission of the virus. So if it was a pub that wasn’t playing music, would you be happy for peopla to go there? I personally would feel quite comfortable to go into a pub where it was quiet, well ventilated, and where you could actually keep your distance from people. This is an industry that is on its knees, and these aren’tjust... These are places that are closing. It’s an industry that was struggling before Covid came along, and now we are at a point where many loans have been taken out to be able to get to reopen, and then being put into tiered systems where the evidence for their closure has been pretty selective. Tom. . . I’m sorry to interrupt you. It’s not because we don’t want to hear what you’ve got to say, but I need to let everyone else in as well. Obviously you feel so passionately, as of course you do — this is the absolute heart and soul of what you do. Let’s hear a bit more from our audience. Yeah, Ijust wanted to say, this is an argument that’s going to rumble on for months to come. Don’t we all think it’s time we have a Minister in Parliament for Hospitality? Tom is nodding at that. Andy? He wants the job! LAUGHTER It could be a new gig for you! Andy? I think the hospitality industry has been given some guidelines, and I think in some way it can be self regulated because, from my point of view, if I was going to go to a restaurant and I thought they were sticking to the guidelines well, I’d go to that restaurant, or I’d go to that pub. And you can see some that maybe aren’t doing it so well, maybe you wouldn’t visit those. So I think as long as there are guidelines, really, these places need to be open. I’m sure they need to be open because, you know, there are a lot ofjobs at stake in this sector, so, you know, a little bit of self regulating, I think, and then people can make their own choice. "I’m not going to go in that pub because it looks too busy and too loud." Anya? I completely agree with what Andy’s saying. I think it’s really important we do keep a lot of these hospitality places open, because especially for students who are using things like this to get through college and university. It’s really hard when you’re not making that money, and it has had a knock—on effect. Not only are the pubs not doing well, but it’s also had a knock—on effect for the employees who work there. And I think it’s a bit... It’s something that you have to work on, so as long as they are doing their bit and keeping it well ventilated and following guidelines, it’s a bit like school. Schools are open, they are all socialising in big numbers, and I think if we can do that at school it’s not... Like, it’s had a big effect on hospitality by shutting down those. Liam? As I said, the hospitality sector employs, you know, 10% of the workforce, and it doesn’t give me any pleasure to say it but we are facing a tsunami of unemployment here, and with the best will in the world even though the vaccine is clearly on the way, and Amen to that, but we could have another three, four, five, six months of lockdown, and I personally think we need to be much smarter about how we lockdown. Locking us down by region is too much of a blunt instrument. Look at the case of Kent, where you’ve got high infections on the Medway towns but then in rural Kent you have some of the lowest infection rates in the country. The Covid Recovery Group in the Commons earlier this week, they pushed the Prime Minister to say he wants to be more granular, breaking down regions into particular areas, so that country pub where our resident scientist says there really is no danger, as long as it’s well ventilated, you know, that’s a family with their house, their mortgage, their life savings. And Tom’s nodding from the waist. So we have to help businesses to get through what could be another six months of this, and, yes, we can offer more help, and we want to see that, but we’re borrowing £400 billion this year, in a single year. I mean, this is completely outlandish amounts of money. There has to be a limit to just throwing money at a situation. It’s now costing us £1 billion a day. So if it’s not question of money, what are you suggesting it is? Is it a question of opening up these areas? I think we need to lockdown in a much more granularfashion, more geographically specific. And, also, it’s often pooh—poohed, that I think there is a case for age stratification when it comes to lockdown, letting the younger generation get out there and do their thing, shielding the elderly, if they want to be shielded. People often say that’s impossible because there are multi—generational households. You know, Fiona, 92% of all British workers, people of working age, do not live with anyone over 65, where the vast majority of Covid fatalities and very serious cases occur. We can use unused hotels if we need to, where you do have multi—generationalfamilies, so workers aren’t coming home, and, in the fabled unfortunate phrase, killing their granny. That would be a lot cheaper than keeping the economy shuttered. It’s notjust the money we’re spending every day on lockdown in terms of furlough and business support. It’s the taxes we’re not raising. And, you know, unless we’re going to have a major economic overhang going on for years and years and years, and the difficulty of funding infrastructure, public services, all the things we need going forward, we have to get our economy moving again. Peter, since we’ve got you here, there’s an argument that a number of people have raised in the press and occasionally in this programme too. This idea of stratification, as you are calling it, but basically shielding certain sections of the population, letting the others have much more freedom. Are you convinced by that? ﬂ I think we know that if we try that then it is going eventually to work its way up to the most vulnerable. Admittedly, there is very good evidence that the most vulnerable are managed to screen themselves off still, and there is a declining rate of disease transmission still in those most vulnerable people, but it is inevitable and we have seen this in many locations, that when you try to allow the rate to go up a little bit in order to open businesses that inevitably it does climb through into the vulnerable population, so it is a really difficult problem, it is a really difficult problam, and I so it is a really difficult problem, and I so hope we can get the and I so hope we ran get the vaccines and I so hope we can get the vaccines into those vulnerable populations so that that effect won’t occur. Sarah? I think I won’t occur. Sarah? Ithinkl completely won’t occur. Sarah? I think I completely agree with Liam’s frustration but I don’t agree with fmstration but I don’t agree with his frustration but I don’t agree with his solution. I think there are several things here. Firstly, his solution. I think there are severalthings here. Firstly, in several things here. Firstly, in defence severalthings here. Firstly, in defence of the tier system, which I will do on the half of the Government, when you decide that you are not going to have complete lockdown with everyone staying at home and when you decide you are not going to have the absolute opposite, you have to draw the line somewhere, and there will always be really horrible peculiarities in the way you draw that line because things will not make sense at that point... The areas are too big. That is my first point. Second point, when you draw that line and say to pubs, you can’t make a living now properly, can’t make a living now property, you have to can’t make a living now properly, you have to provide the support, and the support they are getting now is a third of the support they are getting new is a third of what it was, and in the areas where they have been on lockdown for months they are getting the same, the additional grant, to make separate grants, and you get the same if you are in the Isle of the same if you are in the Isla of Wight as if you the same if you are in the Isle of Wight as if you are in Manchester where you have been lockdown for months and that is simply not fair. In April, there is a new tax regime, you have to start spending, paying your business rates again, you will have to start paying back all this debt. There is a cut—off route —— debt. There is a cut-off route -- that the debt. There is a cut—off route —— that the Government has to address. And we have to do the simply not just relying on the vaccine but doing all the other things, having the test entries in place, and by doing that we reduce the spread of this without, you know, just waiting for the vaccine, because that will take... I would say once you have the 3.2 million people over 80 the 3.2 million peopla over 80 safely the 3.2 million people over 80 safely vaccinated should they want to take the vaccination, then you ran start to take the vaccination, then you can start moving towards a more age ran start moving towards a more age stratified can start moving towards a more age stratified approach. We have a lot of very smart people in this of very smart peopla in this country, and of very smart people in this country, and I agree with Education Secretary at least on that. We have to be more clever rather than just a blunt instrument of regional lockdowns. Let’s take another question, because I want to fit in a few more with the time we have left. Hunt? With EU trade negotiations nearing completion, would the government still opt to walk away if EU negotiators refuse to concede on fishing, a sector worth less than 0.1% of total UK GDP? Michelle? When we had our Brexit referendum, the key theme really was taking back control of our money, our borders, laws and our waters, which means fishing rights. I don’t it is unreasonable that, as an independent sovereign state, we want to be able to have that control over our own water is on a fishing rights at all. We are not asking for something that is unreasonable from the EU or something they have not given to other nations. So this is an important thing, and those negotiations are still going on. There is still the hope that we will get a deal in time before the end... And I get a deal in time before the end... And Ijust get a deal in time before the end... And I just ask, get a deal in time before the end... And Ijust ask, then, because our political editor Laura Kuenssberg is political editor [aura Kuenssberg is reporting political editor Laura Kuenssberg is reporting tonight that the negotiations are going less well, negotiations are going lass well, and negotiations are going less well, and that the EU is throwing in a few new added things to be discussed. As you all know, Laura is not in the you all know, [aura is not in the negotiations you all know, Laura is not in the negotiations and neither am I, so I can’t give a blow by blow... But I’m just asking what is happening. We will find out over the coming days exactly what is happening. We have been very clear throughout this that been very dear throughout this that whether been very clear throughout this that whether we get a deal or not we will make a success of this, and I don’t think it is helpful talking about this all the time as a deal. We have a deal, the withdrawal agreement, which protects things like... But we are talking about a trade deal. We are always harking back to where we wear a while ago with this no deal wear a whila ago with this no deal rhetoric, wear a while ago with this no deal rhetoric, really. Sarah Moore? I wear a while ago with this no deal rhetoric, really. Sarah Moore? Iwas asked on this programme on the 30th of january -- asked on this programme on the 30th ofjanuary -- and asked on this programme on the 30th ofJanuary —— and Sarah? The day ofjanuary -- and Sarah? The day before we ofJanuary —— and Sarah? The day before we left this programme, and I remember saying we have no idea yet what the final deal will look like. We still have no idea what the final deal will look like ten months later. It’s ridiculous. The fact the Government have got to this point where we are right at the cusp of the cut—off point is very bad management, and it’s a very poor show. I think we know the deal is going to be thinner than it was promised to be. I think we were promised all bells and whistles, and promised all bells and whisﬂas, and it’s going to be promised all bells and whistles, and it’s going to be thinner, and I think there are some very significant issues we need to worry about. The Government have told us the deal is there to be done. I am prepared to take them at their word and maybe the deal will be done, and I hope it will, but I know that the industry, the haulage industry, the logistics industries, are very worried about what will happen. But I would say we need to get the deal, the Government need to do what they said they would do, support businesses through Covid, as they said they would, then we need to look beyond, and actually what kind of country are we going to build? How are we going to build an economy next year, that will take more than Rishi Sunak in a fancy cashmere sweater telling us he is going to freeze public sector pay. Do you know what I mean? We need a plan for what is the strategy... Are you saying you would have preferred to negotiate is to have given an early and not by the given an earty and not by the British given an early and not by the British interest? I would have British interest? Iwould have preferred British interest? I would have preferred the Prime Minister to be correct when he said he would get the deal done in correct when he said he would get the deal done inJuly, which is what the deal done in july, which is what he promised. the deal done inJuly, which is what he promised. He didn’t. He was confident the deal was off and ready in December. We haven’t seen it, and there are businesses... If you are in manufacturing now, how can you in manufacturing now, how ran you encourage in manufacturing now, how can you encourage investment abroad when you don’t even know whether you are going to be under a tariff regime in a few weeks? If you are a farmer, how ran you a few weeks? If you are a farmer, how can you plan for the future if how ran you plan for the future if you don’t know how can you plan for the future if you don’t know what the terrorist regime is going to be? A look at our financial services already decided to go elsewhere, because this uncertainty has meant people had no idea what is ahead, and that is bad management. It is an active negotiation. Peter. I management. It is an active negotiation. Peter. Ithink management. It is an active negotiation. Peter. I think it is desperately important that there is attention paid to scientific collaboration in this negotiation over Brexit. We know that the collaborations we have had over the past few decades within the EU have been absolutely vital in driving science, and that is the way science is going. It is very collaborative and international top we have benefited hugely from the European funding system where every thing we get in, we get 8.6 million back, so this is a very important point for UK universities and science, but we get a really good deal in terms of being still able to continue that collaboration. We have a withdrawal agreement. What we are going after agreement. what we are going after is a free agreement. What we are going after is a free trade agreement so we don’t trade on WTO terms and, if we do, there will be tariffs that are low on most sectors but quite high on some others. Maybe the money we get back from Brussels, not spending £10 billion a year, can be used to £10 billion a year, ran be used to subsidise £10 billion a year, can be used to subsidise some of the sectors that will suffer under higher tariffs if there isn’t a free trade agreement. I think there will be in the end, because it makes sense, the EU has a trade deficit with us of almost £100 billion. That is hundreds of thousands of billion. That is hundreds of thousands ofjobs in Germany and France, so thousands ofjobs in Germany and France, sol thousands ofjobs in Germany and France, so I think the European Union once a deal, but I share Alex’s frustration because, on the Alex’s fmstration because, on the surface, Alex’s frustration because, on the surface, fishing is a very small percentage of the Apollo me —— the percentage of the Apollo me -- the economy, and percentage of the Apollo me —— the economy, and even smaller percentage of the French economy, at Macon is a fight on his hands in the next election, not fight on his hands in the next election, notjust from Marine Le election, not just from Marine Le Pen but election, notjust from Marine Le Pen but also the fishermen and politicians representing them in northern France. But look at what we are considering and who is being reasonable for I study these issues closely, and it’s always the Brits by our own media that are presented as being unreasonable at the Europeans presented as being sanguine. You are part of that media. I am a freelance journalist. The Common Fisheries Policy is not in the Treaty of Rome which founded the EU. It was cobbled together quickly as Britain was entering in 1973 and for the cost of a lunch with George Pompidou Edward Heath at the last minute set, yeah, you can the last minute set, yeah, you ran enter our fishing the last minute set, yeah, you can enter our fishing waters, so we know we have a situation where two thirds of fish caught in British waters are by non—British boats. 90% of the cod by non-British boats. 9096 of the cod taught in the by non—British boats. 90% of the cod caught in the English Channel is cut taught in the English Channel is cut by French caught in the English Channel is cut by French boats. That can’t be right. This is a kind of colonial relationship, where some independent countries have a hold over the resources of another now sovereign independent country of stop the reason fishing is such a small proportion of our economy is because it’s been decimated, and that is in poorest parts of the company. Over SON: of poorest parts of the company. Over 50% of the English fishing quota has 5096 of the English fishing quota has been to 50% of the English fishing quota has been to foreign countries. Because our industry can’t get an economic foothold because it has been so marginalised. By the way, lots of my friends in the Green Party for many years were against the Common Fisheries Policy because it has led to overfishing. If we had a British fishing policy, we could allow stocks to replenish in our British waters. why stocks to replenish in our British waters. Why can’t we have the same waters. why can’t we have the same deal that waters. Why can’t we have the same deal that the Norwegians have? That’s why they didn’t deal that the Norwegians have? That’s why they didn’tjoin the That’s why they didn’t join the European That’s why they didn’tjoin the European Economic Community in 1973 for they renegotiate every year fair and square. Lets hear for they renegotiate every year fair and square. Lets hearfrom some for they renegotiate every year fair and square. Lets hear from some of our audience. and square. Lets hear from some of ouraudience. Steph. I and square. Lets hear from some of ouraudience. Steph. Ijust think our audience. Staph. Ijust think this our audience. Steph. Ijust think this often ouraudience. Steph. Ijust think this often ready deal we were promised as another example of an election promise that hasn’t been met, and I election promise that hasn’t been met, and Ijust wanted to ask, when our our elected politicians and leaders don’t actually start taking more accountability for a number of promises that have been broken over the years? The oven ready deal was in reference to the withdrawal agreement. Matthew. Yes, if we take back our waters, how are we going to police them. Michelle, do you have a view on that? This is about taking back control not view on that? This is about taking back control notjust of our waters, back control not just of our waters, as we said back control notjust of our waters, as we said in the referendum, but also our laws, our borders, and our money. Matthew was asking about policing it. This is about the agreement we have. I don’t think we are anticipating, if we enter agreements with other countries, suddenly they are not going to be respected en masse. We did have cod was before so it wouldn’t be unprecedented. From hospitality industry that needs Brexit, a deal to come through as soon as possible, solely for the foundation of understanding where we are, it’s the uncertainty of being able to move forward. Time is running out forward. Time is mnning out quickly. forward. Time is running out quickly. Personally speaking, any deal is going to be better than no deal. The way that prices are going to rise, the uncertainty of the market, we are not a self—sufficient market, we are not a self-sufficient country. We market, we are not a self—sufficient country. We export... We only produced 7096 country. We export... We only produced 70% of the meat we need in produced 7096 of the meat we need in this country. We produced 70% of the meat we need in this country. We import at least 30%. Trade tariffs need to be sorted 3096. Trade tariffs need to be sorted out the top 30%. Trade tariffs need to be sorted out the top there is so much and time is mnning out the top there is so much and time is running out so rapidly as we time is mnning out so rapidly as we get to the end of time is running out so rapidly as we get to the end of Covid—19 we are get to the end of Covid-19 we are then at get to the end of Covid—19 we are then at the point of this Brexit, and hospitality is set there with and hospitality is sat there with all and hospitality is set there with all those precious it is put under, so much that hospitality can bring so much that hospitality ran bring to the so much that hospitality can bring to the forefront of regenerating, of being part of the high street. We talk about high street and retail being in trouble, and a retail experience generating movement, rash, experience generating movement, cash, everything flowing, without rash, everything ﬂowing, without hospitality cash, everything flowing, without hospitality being a part of that why then would you go to the high street? How do we move things forward? We need a solid foundation. We need Brexit deals decided, we need to be able to move forward, we need to future proof how we can need to future proof how we ran build need to future proof how we can build forward through the hospitality industry which is the heating hospitality industry which is the beating heart and soul of communities. That is what we are forgetting when we talk about the offers that we put in. It’s not forgetting when we talk about the offers that we put in. It’s notjust offers that we put in. It’s not just about offers that we put in. It’s notjust about what we sell. We don’t offers that we put in. It’s notjust about what we sell. We don’tjust about what we sell. We don’t just sell food about what we sell. We don’tjust sell food and drink. We give the fabric of society... It is intertwined with meeting up, being a part of it, and that needs the foundation for us as a country, no matter what business it is. We don’t have much what —— time but I want to have much what -- time but I want to get one more have much what —— time but I want to get one more question him from them 26. Due to the Covid crisis, in-person 26. Due to the Covid crisis, in—person teaching across universities has been dire. For some students they only received two hours a week. Equating to roughly £289 per in—person session this semester. How can you possibly semester. How ran you possibly justify semester. How can you possibly justify charging this amount, especially to those in lower socioeconomic brackets? I’m assuming you are university student. What has you are university student. what has your you are university student. What has your experience been? I am, and you are university student. What has your experience been? lam, and it’s your experience been? I am, and it’s been your experience been? lam, and it’s been difficult this semester for the last year, we were all dismissed "TY last year, we were all dismissed very earty, last year, we were all dismissed very early, earlier than expected, very earty, eartier than expected, and it has very early, earlier than expected, and it has come to everybody’s and it has come to everybodrs tension and it has come to everybody’s tension that is become prevalent that Covid isn’t going anywhere, but the management within many universities has been rather abysmal, in my opinion first up we haven’t received the education we have been promised. We haven’t received the resources we have been promised. Everything has been put on hold. It’s rather worrying that I’m still paying obscene fees for minimal education. We only have five minutes, so I’m going to go around quickly. Liam. I have too school—age quickly. Liam. I have too school-age children, one quickly. Liam. I have too school—age children, one at university, but my heart breaks for young people. heart breaks for young peopla. That’s why I heart breaks for young people. That’s why I wanted to see more age stratified lockdown, and older lacturers, stratified lockdown, and older lecturers, older teachers who are lacturers, older teachers who are vulnerabla, lecturers, older teachers who are vulnerable, have pre—existing conditions, of course they can conditions, of course they ran shield conditions, of course they can shield and be financially supported when they are shielding, but I think we have been far too quick to close down schools and, for the most part, universities. For me, it sticks in the craw, and universities. For me, it sticks in the crew, and I’d like to see universities refunding students at this part of the fees they are paying- this part of the fees they are paying, particularly as we have paying, particularty as we have heard paying, particularly as we have heard students from lower socioeconomic groups. Peter. Crib it’s been incredibly tough year not just for students but for staff. My colleagues at imperial have been working day and night to try and make it possible to teach safely. I must say, many universities have succeeded well. There have been very few in—class transmissions of the few in-dass transmissions of the virus, and few in—class transmissions of the virus, and there has been quite a lot of transmission, but that’s mostly due to students being very social, which is after all why they want to come to university. I think it is patchy, but want to come to university. I think it is patchy, butl want to come to university. I think it is patchy, but I do want to acknowledge the huge efforts that have been put in by many people at universities and by hugely dedicated people trying to deliver teaching under very difficult circumstances. The question is about the amount she has been charged, and George obviously feels she’s been short—changed in terms of the short-changed in terms of the teaching she short—changed in terms of the teaching she is getting. It’s really difficult and I sympathise. I know some repayment has been made from Manchester University, is it? You will know better. Is for accommodation, not teaching. I think accommodation, not teaching. Ithink other accommodation, not teaching. I think other universities are looking at that and I think the government should also look and see if there is support they can give, the key is to support they ran give, the key is to be that support they can give, the key is to be that we cracked this thing and make sure we come back to normal as quickly as possible so everybody has quickly as possibla so everybody has to quickly as possible so everybody has to adhere to the rules, we have to to adhere to the mles, we have to improve Test to adhere to the rules, we have to improve Test and Trace. Korea do you think students should be reimbursed for their teaching? We have to look at it. There will be lots of different experiences depending on what university and subject you do. I think the governor should look at it. I did 2 degrees and most people told me were under 44 top bike and that kind of teaching carry on? Been a student is an incredibly expensive thing these days and come up with a lot of debt... It’s not thing these days and come up with a lot of debt... It’s notjust been a lot of debt... It’s not just been a student, that lot of debt... It’s notjust been a student, that whole point, if you student, that whola point, if you are spending student, that whole point, if you are spending money on something and expecting 100% back for it, but expecting 10096 back for it, but you’re not expecting 100% back for it, but you’re not getting it, you are only getting 5096, you’re not getting it, you are only getting 50%, surely you want 50% getting 5096, surely you want 5096 back. getting 50%, surely you want 50% back. Students should be getting their money back. This has been a really difficult time for students, and I totally empathise and try and understand, having not been at university during this time, I can university during this time, I ran only try and do university during this time, I can only try and do that, because it has been really difficult, but we as a government set maximum tuition fees, sorry, the minimum, and universities, if they want to charge that maximum, we have been very dear, they have that maximum, we have been very clear, they have to ensure the dear, they have to ensure the quality is clear, they have to ensure the quality is maintained and the quantity is maintained and that that tuition is also accessible. If you don’t think you have been getting that, I would urge you to make a formal complaint to your university. There is a process in place. So you think the university should pay up if students can prove they haven’t if students ran prove they haven’t had if students can prove they haven’t had much teaching? There are amazing examples of blended learning working, where universities have gone above and beyond to produce innovative, dynamic learning, and it’s a success, it really is. Just it’s a success, it really is. just because it’s a success, it really is. Just because it’s online doesn’t have to mean it’s inferior. Are there some students that feel dissatisfied and like they haven’t got that? Absolutely, and there is a process in place for them. They can claim in place for them. They ran claim from the in place for them. They can claim from the university and then go to the OIA, the independent adjudicator, and they potentially ran get adjudicator, and they potentially can get partial or full refund based ran get partial or full refund based on that. can get partial or full refund based on that. Have any students succeeded in that? In the past, with strikes, a number of students went through that process was there as a time—lag that process was there as a time-lag because that process was there as a time—lag because of the university played first. Nobody is denying it hasn’t been difficult, of course it has. But a number of universities have really invested in that blended learning model by totally —— but I learning model by totally -- but I take on learning model by totally —— but I take on board the comments tonight and I recognise the process that should be followed. Does that answer your question? Yeah, thank you. That is a satisfied customer! That is what Question Time is all about. Lets have a vote in 15 years. Our time is up. Tonight our questions fame time is up. Tonight our questions came from above. Next week, our last Question Time before Christmas, came from above. Next week, our last Question Time before Christmas, the audience will be coming from Chelmsford so, if you live in or around Chelmsford, get in touch on the website and come and be part of our audience. the website and come and be part of ouraudience. I the website and come and be part of our audience. I want to remind you, don’t forget, wherever you live across the UK to apply to join our audience for next year, what we are falling cutie 50 audience for next year, what we are calling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our falling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our pre-selected calling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our pre—selected audience of 50 people pre-selected audience of 50 peopla and pre-selected audience of 50 people and we pre—selected audience of 50 people and we will select from them every week until we can have a live audience back here again. You can audience back here again. You ran apply to be audience back here again. You can apply to be part of that, should you wish, and we hope you will, on the BBC Question Time website. Adrian Chiles is coming up on BBC Radio 5 live with Question Time Extra Time you ran see on live with Question Time Extra Time you can see on the screen had to get you ran see on the screen had to get in touch. For you can see on the screen had to get in touch. For now, thank you very much to the panel for coming here tonight. Peter, thank you for joining us, and the audience from Bath. Thank you for being part of the programme. There is no Question Time without you. Thank you for watching. From Question Time, bye-bye