Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Grant Shapps, appointed by Boris tonight’s panel, Grant Shapps, appointed by BorisJohnson when he appointed by Boris johnson when he became appointed by BorisJohnson when he became leader, formerly co—chairman became leader, formerty co-chairman of the party became leader, formerly co—chairman of the party under David Cameron. Labour’s shadow sport minister eluted Labour’s shadow sport minister elected in 2010, a backbencher under eluted in 2010, a backbencher under jeremy Corbyn elected in 2010, a backbencher under Jeremy Corbyn are now a member of jeremy Corbyn are now a member of Keir Jeremy Corbyn are now a member of Keir Starmer’s front bench, Alison McGovern. David Linden, an apprentice who left school at 16 and became leader of the youth wing of the SNP before being elected to Westminster three years ago. Joining Westminster three years ago. joining us down Westminster three years ago. Joining us down the line, Helen Stokes—Lampard, a practising GP and Stokes-lampard, a practising GP and chair of Stokes—Lampard, a practising GP and chair of the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. And one of the countrrs Royal Colleges. And one of the country’s most successful retailers, countrrs most successful retailers, chair of country’s most successful retailers, chair of the online grocery chair of the online grocery brand Orado, chair of the online grocery brand Ocado, former chief executive of Orado, former chief executive of Marks 5. Ocado, former chief executive of Marks & Spencer, Conservative peer Marks 5. Spencer, Conservative peer Stuart Marks & Spencer, Conservative peer Stuart Rose. APPLAUSE Good evening, welcome to my guests here in the studio and to Helen, who isjoining us down the line. Welcome, Helen. And we have a live audience with us, in the way we’ve become accustomed to by now, via video link. Tonight, you are all in Carlisle or in the Carlisle area. So, hello, good to see you, very good to have you with us. Thank you forjoining us. And, of course, to you at home, you canjoin in the conversation as well in the way you know, on social media at bbcquestiontime. So let’s hear what you have to say, as well. OK, let’s start with our first question tonight, which is from David Ewing. Good evening, Fiona, and welcome to Carlisle. Has the time come for the UK to adopt the Australian policy of processing illegal asylum seekers outside of UK waters? So, there’s been a bit of talk about this today. Plans, blue sky thinking, I’m not sure what, from the Government. We’ll come to you, Grant, in a moment. Alison? I think we’re a bit fed up of having policies that are pulled out of a hat by the Conservative party almost... You know, some of these ideas that are being suggested that risk being really inhumane, that are being trailed almost to get people stirred up. I think we’ve had enough of that and what we actually need is a decent policy, where we treat people properly who have suffered, you know, in conflict, in the worst situations in the world and we have... What is it particularly that you are objecting to in the ideas that have been mooted? In terms of potentially government policy regarding asylum seekers? David’s question, I think, refers to some of the ideas that have been trailed in the media, that then later kind of get abandoned, about islands 4000 miles away or offshore, you know, centres, to receive people. Labour did suggest something similar under Blair, processing people in Tanzania, for example? Ithink... Take, for example, what’s happened with European refugees, for example in Calais, where the Home Office could have more proactively sent officials, could have worked harder to get people who are pretty vulnerable dealt with in a proper way and they consistently haven’t done so. There are whole issues around the underfunding of border force that I worry risks our security and that’s happened over the past ten years. But what really worries me about what we’re hearing in the press all the time is sort of I almost suspect it’s a bit of a distraction technique. You know, the Government’s having problems so they come up with another one of these ideas to get people stirred up. I don’t think we should do that. I think they should put forward a proper set of policies, we’ll scrutinise them based on their merits and we should have an immigration policy that way. Ishould mention, David, you referred to them as illegal immigration. If people are claiming asylum, they are not illegal yet. It depends on what decision is taken regarding their status. Stuart? Well, listen, this is a very modern dilemma but, of course, it isn’t a modern dilemma, it’s been around for hundreds of years. This country has always been the place that people want to come to. We’ve been accepting people here on a migratory basis for hundreds of years, whether it’s the Huguenots or the people escaping the pale of Russia and we’ve always been a home to these people. We’ve got a physical problem because they are coming over. We’ve got a legal problem because you can’tjust deport them and you have got a moral problem because we have a moral obligation, I think, in this world, as a very civilised and very rich country, to be able to help these people. On the physical side, that is not going to go away so we have to think about how we mitigate the problems and how we do deter people from coming here and how we negotiate with our European colleagues about perhaps sharing the load and have better ways of stopping people make that perilous journey. On the legal front, when people are here, they have certain rights and we must uphold those rights and then... So what do you think about the idea, David’s question is about processing these people not on UK soil? I don’t know who it was in the House of Commons today but I very much agree with what she said, this is the most bonkers idea I’ve ever heard. I think the idea of actually bringing people in and shipping them off to St Helena or putting them on used ships, used ferries in the North See or the Irish Sea is preposterous. I think it is inhumane. I don’t think it would work. They’ve got to be fed. They’ve got to be clothed, they’ve got to be educated, they’ve got to be looked after, how are you going to do that? Is it bonkers, did you think it was bonkers when you read about this idea about Ascension? First of all, the agreement stuff and we’ve got a long and proud history as a country of people coming here and seeking refuge, including my family some generations ago. And I think that Britain should be proud of that but we also have to accept that we have an issue with the illegal gangs running criminal outfits, bringing people over across a very, very dangerous crossing in tiny boats. That’s the issue that needs to be dealt with. But is sending people to Ascension island the way of dealing with it? So any responsible government would, of course, have a look at how other countries are dealing with these things and have dealt with them successfully and look at a variety of different ideas. But I have to say at this stage, Alison says, I’m sick and tired of reading things in the newspaper. Well, you and I both because you read all sorts of stuff in the newspaper and usually it’s not government policy or anything of the sort. You’re giving a briefing... Let’s just... Grant, just clarify for us. Hang on, we’ve all read... People think somehow this is deliberate. No, newspapers have to actually write stuff, they write stuff and then you have to respond. But at this point in time, none of this is a policy. When it is, of course, someone will come out and confirm it. But were these things, some of these things actually discussed, then, the idea of this sort of magic wave machine that would send the boats back by creating waves? That was actually discussed in a meeting? Not to my knowledge. Or sending people to Moldova? Look... I’ve not been to meetings about those things at all. Oil rigs? But you must know. I’m sure you’ve been briefed before you came on tonight, were those things discussed? I can honestly say I’ve never been in a meeting about any of those things at all. But what is true and what is quite proper is we have to deal with the criminal gangs. It’s a disgusting people trafficking exploitation that’s going on, that puts people’s lives at risk and actually as that humane country that I described at first, of course we should look at if there are better ways we can help with the situation. One of the things is not to turn a blind eye and enable these gangs to bring very, very vulnerable people to our shores, some of whom’s lives have been put at risk along the way. So is the Government is serious... First it was the subject of leak and then it was confirmed this was something the Government was thinking about, how to deal with migrants coming over the Channel. Is this something we’re likely, is this a serious proposition by the Government, off shoring asylum seekers and processing them off British soil? Well, as I say, I can’t comment on speculation in newspapers but I can absolutely... I’m asking you if that is a government idea? I can absolutely confirm the Government is quite rightly and properly looking at and thinking through all the possible different ways to prevent people from actually dying in the Channel. And these gangs trafficking people. If we weren’t doing that, you would be asking on earth we weren’t. David? Fiona, this is absolutely astonishing. The Secretary of State for Transport, which last time I checked include boats, doesn’t seem to know whether or not the Government has a plan to put asylum seekers on boats. One of the things I see in myjob as the MP for Glasgow East is a really high asylum case load. I’ve got to say that the people who come to these islands to seek asylum are some of the most vulnerable people in the world. People who are fleeing war, sexual violence, famine, persecution because of their sexuality and the way that the British government treat asylum seekers within the Home Office system is absolutely despicable at the best of times. And the fact that the UK Government can’t rule this out right now really does indicate that they do want to treat people like some sort of cattle prodding or some sort of penal colony. What I’d like the Secretary of State to rule out right now is this idea that they would use Scottish islands as some way of processing asylum seekers. I don’t know if Grant can take that opportunity right now because if he can’t, that would be deeply alarming. First of all, I ought to take the opportunity to correct something you’ve just said, which is of course people come here fleeing terrible persecution and Britain, as I said and has been commented on, has a proud reputation of bringing people in and thousands of people making new lives here. But you just described it as if somebody in France is being persecuted and, actually, France is a freedom loving country as well, where people are already within the EU. So I think it’s just very important to be careful and cautious with our language here and not try and present a situation which is inflammatory. Well, I find it very difficult to take lectures about careful and cautious language from a government that has the hostile environment. Every single day in my constituency casework, I see some of the most vulnerable people in the world being messed about by the Home Office, left in substandard accommodation because the Home Office don’t care and this is just the latest example of really irresponsible policy from the British government, which has no care whatsoever for some of the most vulnerable people coming to this country. Let me see what our audience think. David? You asked the question. We all want to be a country that does give protection to those who need it. My father’s side of the family was given refuge in this country from the Spanish Civil War. The point is, these people are coming here illegally from the safe haven of France. You know... They are not all coming illegally, David. I’m sorry tojump in but they’re not all coming in illegally, no. If it’s a legal application to join the UK, that’s fine. But don’t forget, these people are going through Europe, they’re going through Spain, Greece, Italy, France. Nobody’s yet explained to me why the camps in France are still in position. I don’t understand that. Why aren’t those asylum applications being processed in France or being processed in Greece, or being processed in Spain? Or Italy? I don’t understand that, really, and it’s been like this for quite some time. And whilst we’re all fighting the Covid crisis, boats are still coming to the UK and it can’t be sustainable, it’s unsustainable. Dale? From my point of view, the UK already has a plethora of impending prominent crises. It’s got Scottish independence, coronavirus, Brexit and Ijust believe that the demonisation of these desperate, vulnerable people isjust a horrid distraction from the Conservative government’s failure on all of those fronts. Helen? Thank you. As a front line clinician, I see some of the most vulnerable people in our society, including people who are here as refugees. And the vast majority of them need our support and our compassion and as a civilised human being, I feel deeply uncomfortable about the thinly veiled racism that is often wrapped up in these dialogues. So we are a civilised nation, as others have said, let’s behave in a civilised manner to the most vulnerable people around us. 0K, there’s a number of questions being put tonight so we’re going to move on. Before I do, Ijust want to tell you that we are looking for people to join our virtual audience, sadly virtual but it’s what we have to do in these times. Just like the people we have here from Carlisle, next week we will be in Coventry and the week after that we are going to be in Edinburgh. So if you live in either of those two cities or thereabouts, do get in touch. Go to the Question Time website, you can fill in the form there and think of a question or an issue that you’re burning to ask and let’s see if we can get you on the programme. It would be great to hear from you. Right, let’s take our next question now which is from Charlotte Tollman. Hello. So my question is, recently, thousands of students have returned to or have just started university. But for students in Glasgow, the virus has spread so quickly that new students have been forced to isolate in their unfamiliar halls. We’ve been lied to about the quality of teaching, and Ifeel I’ve been coaxed back to university away from the safety of my home in Cumbria, whilst still paying full price. There has been no regard for my mental health and the only concern that I feel has been is me being part of the profit. The money issue is bad enough issue but what action is the Government taking to protect students’ mental health? Charlotte’s at a Scottish university. David? Yeah, I really feel for Charlotte. I mean, obviously I have lots of students in my own constituency who have gone back to university and I think... So what can you do to help? The first thing that we doing, for example, is to try and increase testing. So we’ve now put in a walk in testing Centre in Glasgow and in St Andrews as well. We are acknowledging this is not the fault of young people. Going to university is an incredibly exciting thing for young people and it’s a very difficult time for them, as well. But they can’t walk in if their self—isolating, as thousands are. At the moment, there’s lots of guidance that’s being worked up with the National Union of Students, which has certainly been welcomed. We’ve given quite a lot of guidance to the accommodation providers as well. It’s about understanding that for students this is a very, very difficult time and we are doing absolutely everything we can to support them, in conjunction with the NUS. And I do feel for Charlotte. Hopefully we’ll try and get through this as best as we can and will looking to try and get in a situation where students can return at Christmas. But the situation in Glasgow is there’s no doubt it’s a perilous situation it’s about protecting people’s safety, first their physical safety but also their mental health of students, as well. It’s a very, very vulnerable time for them and my heart goes out to them and we’ll do our best to support them. Helen? Look, my student days were some of the most exciting and rewarding of my life. Are you, like everyone else, feel the students who are in this situation, but the period of lockdown that is being proposed is short. It’s a couple of weeks, and then a greater degree of normality will return. But of course all of life is profoundly affected and Covid isn’t going to be passed in a matter of weeks. We are here for the long haul. We are into a second wave and, indeed, a third and fourth wave will come and we need to be prepared for that and we cannot suspend education for all that time. I’m affiliated to the University of Birmingham. I know the huge efforts that lecturers have been putting in to prepare to do as much and a high quality online as possible, because nobody wants this situation. That Helen, Charlotte’s point... I’m sorry to interrupt, Charlotte’s point is critically about the mental health of students as much as anything. 0h, absolutely, and we need to ensure students are mentored, supported, they have great communication and that basic necessities are provided for them. They can’t be the victims in this, that’s really not helpful because it’s not students felt that they’re in this situation. There’s an awful lot of blame going on in some places, as well, and I’m horrified to hear that. I’ve seen worse behaviour in older adults than I have an youngsters, by large. What would Labour do differently when it comes to Charlotte’s point and I can see you’ve got your hand up, so I’m going to come back to you in a moment. When it comes to helping students, particularly in regard to their mental health, students who are isolating on their own in halls, many of them for the first time. So there’s two things for me, firstly the testing system and the tracing system, crucially, tracing people who have got the virus, so they can isolate properly. Making that system works underpins get a better scenario almost for every aspect of our life and that goes for students as well, wherever they are. Because if we can have a proper system, where people know that they can have a test and get the results back in a speedy way, that will help us across every aspect of our life. I have had constituents have a test and not get the results back for five to seven days. That is not acceptable and it’s got to change. Obviously, the office of students and other bodies are listening to what students are saying and I know they want to encourage universities to be very responsive to the needs of students and you know whilst we’ve all seen on social media the examples where that’s not been the case, universities have got to be responsive to their students needs and the best ones I’m sure there are lots of people in higher education who would absolutely agree what I’ve said. One final point that Charlotte said that is very important is about students and mental health. And we know that as a country we have let young people down in terms of their mental health for too long and you know, as a Labour Party, we have scrutinised the Government on this for years now and I think that this crisis has shown that failure in sharp relief. So whilst from opposition it’s early days for us, at the moment, but I know that priority of having the principle of that’s got to improve will be part of how we listen to what students are going through new and try to put policies in place that will help them. Since you have mentioned mental health and I hope you don’t mind me referring to this, you have put your own mental health out in the public domain and I wondered if you wanted to share that? Well, I mean, you know as the shadow ministerfor sport, I think that sport is incredible for mental health, for a really important reason which is that physical activity we know had a positive impact on people’s mental health, but when you’re doing sport, you get the joy of being part of a team as well and I know, I am sure Charlotte and lots of other students will be missing some of that, and I think once we’re able to get to more normal times, I certainly have found, in my own feelings ofjust sort of unhappiness and particularly around body shape and ho image that body shape and body image that being part of a sports team and big shout out to the Westminster football team and the Wirral football team and their brilliant coaching, Ijust know how brilliant sport has been for my mental health. Is it something that’s helped you in particular? I’ve really surprised this week about how you know I wrote this article for Grazia magazine about it and how many people have said, do you know what? Ifeel the same, I have never had much confidence about my body shape and actually sport has helped me. It turns out I thought I was alone in this and I wasn’t. So it’s been a good thing in that regard. There’s been a comment from our audience. Charlotte, you wanted to come back in? Ijust wanted to go back to the first point in terms of people saying that we only have to isolate for two weeks and it’s not that big a deal in terms of our education, but it’s notjust if we get coronavirus or are exposed to it, it is the fact that we can’t join sports teams if somebody gets Covid in training, or can’tjoin sports teams in general. Our whole life has gone on line and I can’t mix outside my household, because I’m above the border. This affects every aspect of university life and I think to minimise it down to those two weeks is... Quite almost patronising to us and there’s been no clear guidance and that is what we would like tonight from you guys is when is the next step coming. I willjust go around the audience a bit more if I may. Gemma? Good evening. As a nurse in Cumbria and as a mum, I think the mental health of young people is of paramount importance at the moment. But all I keep seeing is our Government talk about practical solutions and ploughing money into this that and the other and isolating people further. But there actually doesn’t seem to be any clear strategy in this day and age to support young people’s mental health. I mean, young people, especially as Charlotte said, at university, they’re isolated from theirfamily, theirfriends, they’re in new situations, but the Government never appears to touch on mental health and as we know in the whole of the UK mental health provisions for young people are very poor and you know are we going the see an increase in the suicide rate in young people, because of the Covid outbreak. Catherine? Hi there, Ijust wanted to agree with what Charlotte said and actually pick up on a point where there is a degree of cynicism I feel, I have two children in the north-east, one of whom is an 18—year—old fresher, who has gone to university expecting a very different life to the one he has in Cumbria and actually has found himself in halls of residence in an eight—bedded flat by himself, because everybody else hasn’t turned up yet. And they’re not entirely sure when they will. Soto minimise students’ experiences and say well, it’s only a couple of weeks, they’ll be able to cope, they have got social networks, well actually some of these children haven’t at the moment and they’re away from home for the first time and I am concerned that actually even though he has a sibling in the same city, at the moment with their lockdown they’re not meant to spend time with each other, because they’re in different households. 50 actually this isn’t just a temporary, it is young people they’ll be OK in a few weeks. I think we could see really long—term impacts on children who are going away for the first time in different environments and different cities where they don’t know people and we haven’t really from the university perspective put in that kind of support that I would have expected as a parent, let alone as a mental health practitioner. June, I think you take a rather different view? What I was saying was that this could be the new normal and we all, whether we are students or not, have to get our heads around this situation and learn to adapt really. I’m not belittling it, I have got three children, thankfully they’re the other side of the later 205, so they have been through this period and I just think as long as you have got a decent computer and I think that is something the universities could ensure and don’t assume everybody that goes to university has a decent computer, but without a decent computer that you ran jump on and off 2A hours a day, as it suits you, you’re sort of dead in the water. But as long as the tutors, you know, really work hard to get everything online and make sure everybody’s on board that needs to be on board, I think this could work. It is such a sad time for young people as students. 0K. You know. No thank for your point. Stuart? Charlotte’s original point was important about the mental health of nation. But it is notjust about the mental health of the nation. It is about the physical health of those people who are not Covid sufferers, who are not able to get into hospitals at the moment. Jeremy Hunt made the point yesterday that there are 10 million people waiting for appointments in hospitals and they’re not able to go there. It’s the health of our children in schools and universities who are not getting a proper education. It is the health, dare I say it, of business and what I really worry about now is the cure that we are currently putting our country through actually worse than the disease and do we not have to come to a time where we now think this is livelihoods versus lives. And I don’t think we have had that debate properly and I think we’re going to find, as we come into the autumn, we have a further lockdown or potentially more lockdowns, we come to the spring, we have unemployment coming through, dare I say it, we’ve got the hill, whether it’s a good hill or a bad hill about Brexit. The time in the spring it could be very difficult. And if we just keep locking people up and don’t come to terms with the fact this illness is not going away. So do you think should happen in terms of universities? I think we should actually be more relaxed, we should learn to live with the virus, 40,000 people have died, but let’s ask the question and Helen is the expert, how many peopla, Helan, in the UK have died exclusively of Covid? Well, I mean we know that measures we said it is about 43,000 have died of Covid. We suspect there’s another 10,15,000 on top, that’s the excess deaths. But people are dying all the time of lots of diseases and we do know that there are implications of the lockdown on other health behaviours. And we know there are people out there who haven’t come forward with their cancers and I do worry about the cancer gap. And there is something really serious to say, if you have worrying symptoms, you’ve got a lump, you’ve got a strange bleeding problem, please come forward. The NHS is open for you, it has been open and it continues to be open for you, despite Covid. I think there is some serious things that we do need to get better in terms of our messaging to the public. That’s my point, the unintended consequence of That’s my point, the unintended consequence of what we’re doing for this specific illness may have much bigger knock on effects that we haven’t even thought about it and we need to be thoughtful about it. James? Hi there. Yeah, I can’t of don’t understand the student situation, because my daughter started reception class this year, which was great. But she brings home 27 households into my house every day. So you know the younger age group are meant to be asymptomatic, or carry the virus, but don’t have symptoms, but I think the comment just made there, we do need to learn to live with this virus now and all our children at school and every day my daughter brings home 27 households into my house. And there’s no control over that. And if you think of all the children that are in school, secondary schools, primary schools, you know there’s no control over this virus any more. We just do not know who has it and who is bringing it into each other’s household. Gordon? With the situation in universities are we simplyjust kicking the can down the road? I feel we shouldn’t lockdown special age groups of people that tend not to suffer too badly with the disease. I know anybody suffering with it is terrible, but I think we are just kicking the can further down the road. Grant, Charlotte said, we have been lied to about the quality of teaching, I feel I have been coaxed back to university, away from the safety of my home in Cumbria, paying full price, with no regard for my mental health, the only concern being profit. Has she got a point there that the universities and the Government have not been straight with students about what it was going to be like? First of all, I feel hugely for Charlotte. We can’t expect young people just to put their lives completely on hold. We have to try to get the universities up and running again, education running again and that is by and large working. But Charlotte’s points have been big questions of debate in my household this week, because my eldest has just got back to university last week and one of, he lives in a house of four, and one of the others has tested positive, so they’re all under self—isolation and going through that sort of you know point in time where we have come here, we have started to study, we are now having to do that through computers, but in a different city. In terms of Charlotte’s question, when she says she has been coaxed back without any regard for her mental health and we have heard many students say we weren’t told it would be like this. We thought we’d get some online learning, but you would get learning face to face and they’re not getting that. It is because of the circumstances and no one’s got a sort of magic solution to this. We have got to be up front and honest about it. Coronavirus is something that we are going to have to live with. I hear what Stuart says and others, but the reality is that although it probably won’t kill most younger people, it can certainly carry and spread it and eventually it hurts older people. That’s exactly what we’re seeing in the figures now in hospital, in admissions. The 300 and odd people who are on ventilators tonight, the 2,500 people who are in hospital with coronavirus. It will spread. So we do have to keep taking those measures but, you know, as Charlotte and others pointed out, we can’tjust put lives on hold forever. So we have to try and make this work as the new normal for the time being and it does mean that there will be probably a combination of remote learning in situations, but there are lots of university cases, if you’re training to be, I don’t know... Physical things, where you have to have a degree of with lecturer time because it can be something that... Medicine, for example, where you have to be there. So, no, look, I don’t think people were sort of coaxed back. Universities are autonomous organisations, but I think it would be wrong to ask or expect students not to return to study and not to try to get universities back and I would challenge anyone who says that we shouldn’t be trying. Charlotte’s point was maybe the universities were not quite as open about what it might have been like. Let me just put a question to David. Nicola Sturgeon, I was listening to Nicole Sturgeon yesterday, would not commit herself to students at Scottish universities going home for Christmas. So is there still a chance that students like Charlotte, she comes from Carlisle but she is at university in Scotland, may not be able to go home for Christmas, is that still the case? We are certainly very hopeful that students can get back for Christmas and if we ran make that happen, we will, but... But you are not committing to it, maybe they can isolate for two weeks beforehand, it’s still a possibility they may have to stay in university for Christmas? We are in a situation, Fiona, where in Glasgow, hundreds of students have tested positive the coronavirus. These are young people who are using shops in the West End of Glasgow, potentially mixing around with other people. The most important thing at this stage for us is to try and contain this virus and that’s why, on a short—term basis, we’ve put those lockdown procedures in place. I get that but staying at Christmas, staying at university at Christmas is still on the table, potentially? We are very hopeful that people can get home for Christmas. Christmas is a long way off at the moment. The most important thing is controlling this virus and any politician worth their salt will have that as a number one priority at the moment. Let’s take another question, from Jonathan Donald. Hi. Have the localised lockdowns and restrictions been totally ineffective in slowing the spread of the virus and has the inability of the UK Government to communicate the messages effectively contributed to some extent to noncompliance amongst certain individuals within society? Well, Jonathan’s directing his question initially to the UK Government, so, Grant, I’m going to ask you. There’s also some talk now, as I understand it, about simplifying the message with a traffic light system, is that true? Well, first of all, no, I don’t think it’s been ineffective, to answer your question directly. Looking at examples, like Luton, for example, or Leicester, where the numbers were very high. Local lockdowns, which aren’t the full lockdowns we all knew at the beginning of this, were put in place and we saw the numbers come down and, actually, come down to now what are levels which mean they can come out of that process. So, I think it’s helped a lot. It may also be the case, and the Chief Medical Officer, Chris Whitty, has been saying this, that by having lockdowns in specific areas, as we did in Luton and Leicester and now in the north—west and parts of the north—east, we are preventing the spread, preventing the whole country from having to go into full lockdown and then able to unlock those areas. So that’s the hope. Simplification, you’ll have to wait for, and I understand the point but, actually, wherever you are in the country, if you hear that your area is in a lockdown area, it’s very quick and very easy and we just demonstrated it before coming on the programme, to go to gov.uk and you can simply look up where you live and see exactly what the rules are. So, they are easy to follow, you can look them up. I think it’s very important... It can’t be that easy to follow if the Prime Minister got them wrong himself. Well, everyone mis—spea ks. No, sure, I’m not trying to make a cheap point, I’m simply saying it can’t be that easy to understand if even the man in charge can’t get it right. He was talking about the rule of six because that is generally the rule throughout the country. But it is true, in an area that has a local lockdown, additional rules will apply, which generally mean you can’t mix with other people in your own home, in your garden, in restaurants and pubs. But you should check the rules on gov.uk locally. But to answer the question, yes, we do believe that from an epidemiological point of view, it is doing something and therefore worth pursuing, and it has stopped us, thus far, from having to go into a second full lockdown, which is surely an everybody’s interests. And, David, in terms of communicating messages effectively and noncompliance among some individuals, what’s this issue with the SNP? Well, it’s an MP who is no longer an SNP Whip and for very good reason. I’ve got to say I’m pretty furious with the behaviour of Margaret Ferrier... Do you just want to explain to viewers who might not know what she’s done? U nfortu nately, yes. One of my former colleagues had tested positive for coronavirus and used a train over the course of this week, quite rightly, she’s lost the whip. So, just to be clear, she suspected she had symptoms and took a test. While she was waiting for the results, she went down to Westminster to debate coronavirus regulations, having broken them herself and then when she did test positive, she went on the train back to Scotland? Yes, and it’s utterly inexcusable and it’s right that she’s lost the whip for that because... Do you think she should resign? She herself called for Dominic Cummings to resign. She’s lost the whip, do you think she should resign? I certainly think her position is untenable, to be honest. So you think she should resign? You’re asking people to follow very, very strict public health guidance, and if a member of Parliament can’t do that, then they’ve got to reflect upon the position. So let me hear it from you then, you think her position’s untenable, do you think she should resign? I find it very difficult to say to my constituents who lives in the neighbouring constituency to Rutherglen and Hamilton that her actions were excusable and so I think she does have to reflect on her position. You think she should resign? I don’t think her position is tenable and she should resign. Gordon, you are nodding your head along to that? Yeah, I think if she definitely called for Dominic’s resignation, I do think he should have resigned, then I do think her job is untenable. We can’t expect the population of the country to follow the guidelines, even if they’re not quite sure what they are, when the people in charge, who make policy, who appear on the media, simply defy belief and even though she knew she had the virus and she had a positive test, she actually got on a train. I can’t believe it. Stupid. Gary? Just on a lighter note, I’m starting to wonder with all the confusion around Covid rules and regulations whether we need a Friday night because to replace Have I Got News For You hosted by BorisJohnson? LAUGHTER. Of course, he used to host Have I Got News For You quite some time ago now. Yeah, exactly. I mean, Stuart, Jonathan’s question is about have localised lockdowns and restrictions been ineffective in controlling the spread of the virus and has the inability of the Government, in his view, the UK Government, to communicate the message effectively contributed to noncompliance? What’s interesting is that when you look at polls, the most recent poll looking at confidence, clarity from the UK Government about the clarity of their message, confidence in that is very low. When it comes to the Scottish Government, confidence about that particular thing, in terms of clarity and communication, is generally pretty high. But nonetheless, on both sides of the border, we see lockdowns and infections rising. So, I’m wondering, does it make any difference? Well, my personal view is it doesn’t. If you’re asking me the question. What I find quite comical is, listen, this is a very serious illness that we are facing but it isn’t the end of life on Earth. We are going to have to live with it, as the Chancellor has said, as Grant has just said. The second thing is that it’s incomprehensible that in a country with 50—60 million people we’ve actually got four different rules. So I can go to a pub in London tonight and I have to leave by 10pm. But I can go to Belfast and I can stay until 10:30. I can be with some friends in London, six, but I can’t do that in Scotland. Why can’t we have uniform rules? Across the UK, which would make it much simpler for everybody? But the real issue for me is one I tried to raise before, is I’m not remotely poking a stick at our audience here, but I’m quite interested that we are sitting here talking about lockdown, lockdown, lockdown. Charlotte’s question about mental health. Nobody is talking about the UK plc’s health. We did last week. We may not be talking about it right now at this minute, Stuart, and I’m sorry you weren’t there. You may be weren’t watching but we absolutely did talk about that. All our futures and livelihoods depend on us getting back to some sort of normality and living with this crisis and that the real issue. But the health of the workforce is an important input to that. I mean, Ijust disagree with what you said before about there’s lives versus livelihoods. That’s not right, it’s not one thing versus the other because if you haven’t got a healthy workforce, then the economy will not be successful. 50, actually, being able to isolate the virus is the most important thing, notjust the people’s health, absolutely crucial though that is, that is absolutely vital for our economy. But as we know, it was pointed out by one of our participants this evening, we can’t actually put the... All you do, as the gentleman said, is kick the can down the street. You can suppress it here, it pops up there, it’s like a balloon. And you can help businesses be more and more Covid safe. That’s what lots of businesses are doing quite successfully... Alison, you’re quite right. Give us testing at the door of every business once a week. Give us a test and trace system that works, so people can have security. Give us the security — Grant Shapps is the Minister of Transport... Are you listening, Grant, are you listening? When we can get on the tube and it’s safe. I’ve been on the tube on London every single day this week, nobody’s using it. It’s got to be fine. Buses are not being used. The road system is completely clogged up because we’ve told people wherever possible don’t share a car, go on your own, except you can’t travel anywhere because the roads are alljammed up. It’s nonsense that we have to be able to find a way through this problem but I understand... Stuart, that’s exactly what we’re doing with these local lockdowns, which you are also against which is curious because if you look at the rate across the country it’s... I don’t know, 13 cases per 100,000 in the south—west. But it’s over 100 in other places. It’s a nonsense to say... If you want to apply the same rules everywhere, we will end up in a position where none of us can do anything. What we are trying to do, and I think arguably successfully now, is get the economy moving, which it is, but still protect people’s lives, as well. The economy’s not moving. We have to carry on doing that until the cavalry of a scientific solution to this, a vaccine or whatever, comes over the horizon. Until then, we have to do what actually works. We know these local lockdowns, to return to the question, actually do bring the rates down. Now, Stuart, I’m sorry to interrupt but you want to talk about UK plc. We talked about it last week and there’s lots of people in our audience... I will shut up. No, because I know they want to talk about it tonight. So, let’s hear from some of them. Victoria, you have your hand up, I’m going to come to you in a second. Let’s hearfrom James Hill, and after that, John Miller. Hi. Yeah, the whole mixed messages thing. I mean, when you have scientific advisors that are coming out with comments like "Hospital admissions are steady" but "On a rapid incline". Well, which one is it? Is it steady or is it rapid? And these people are advising the Government and then we get mixed messages from the Government at the moment that are saying what we should and shouldn’t do. I had full faith in the scientific side of things, up until the beginning of this week, when they came out and started using all this terminology and coming out with comments like that. The public don’tjust know to go left or right with a lot of these restrictions and rules. James, you have a restaurant, haven’t you? I’ve got two restaurants. You have two restaurants, forgive me. Not one but two. Now, how is the pandemic affecting you at the moment? Obviously, I assume business is down but in terms of bookings for the future, Christmas, say? We just don’t know what to do for December. We don’t know if we should keep our staff. We’ve got... Normally at this time of year, I have two thirds of my Christmas bookings in, I have large companies who use one of my restaurants. They have their Christmas parties there. I have no Christmas bookings at all right now and it’s a worrying, daunting experience, going into this period for our trade. Ijust don’t understand how the newJob Support Scheme is meant to help our trade at the moment. We have no guidance on the next three months at all, of what our trade should do, what we should advise our customers. Do we get Christmas party menus out, do we not get Christmas party menus out? And there is just no guidance whatsoever for our trade at the moment. I’m not saying the Government hadn’t done wonders so far with the economy, with the packages we’ve had, the furlough scheme for staff, the grants we’ve had, brilliant. I can’t deny that. But moving forward now, we’ve got six months ahead of us where we are going to lose so much of the hospitality trade because of uncertainty. John? Well, I agree with James. I have a hotel as well as a restaurant and in the hotel, we caterfor weddings and wedding guests. Now just last week, we were allowed 30 wedding guests and overnight, it was so funny, I listened to Grant there and he said everything should be taken locally and individually, yeah? And all of a sudden, they put a blanket and said no weddings are only 15. I can do the same in my restaurant that can take 120 people, Covid safe, with two metres apart, yet he will not look at anything at all that is ideal for individual restaurants at all. Theyjust put a blanket ban and I don’t know... I was actually out on the Saturday night. I kicked everybody out at ten o’clock and they had a street party. They had a street party outside? Yeah, they had a street party. They all gathered outside and they had a street party, to take the beer home and went somewhere, like a party outside or to people’s houses, yet they’ve been already in a Covid safe environment. This is what the ten o’clock rule does. Victoria... We are a tourism business, we have already lost our Christmas. So what is your business? We are a tea room, gift shop, informs centre for Hadrian’s Well, we rely heavily on visitors. We have obviously had no visitors. Our Christmas, our version of Christmas is from April through to, well, obviously basically you knowJune, July, August. We have already lost our business. Our profit for the entire year. And we have had to temporarily close until March next year. I really don’t think that anybody understands what it’s like to lose your business. And the impact. And I don’t really think that any of the politicians get it. They have never run anything. They don’t understand it. They’re all being paid. They’re sitting you know receiving their pay every month, but they don’t know what it’s like to be in a stressful environment and you know I’m not alone. There is three million people who haven’t had any support, we have had a little bit of support. But we seem to be left high and dry. What do you do when you don’t have any revenue coming in, how do you pay, how do you sustain your business? And yet we are just classed by the Government as not viable. But we are viable. We had a successful business for ten years. And only through Covid have we had no visitors and therefore you know no revenue and we arejust cast aside. As James was saying, we can lose Christmas, what is anybody going to do about that? Does anybody really care? Are we expendable? We are the backbone of the country — small businesses. And we are described as being the backbone of the country. But we are just going to be left new high and dry. All right. I have had to close. You know my staff, I have had to make redundant. This has devastated me personally. And yet everybody’s just sitting here thinking about you know, what? They’ll just move on. But how can we move on? What can we do? What is anybody going to do to help us. I should point out, a number of politicians have and do run businesses, I know Grant has been one of them. Helen, I know I have got to come to you, I want to come to Chris, you had your hand up. If people did what they were being asked to do, it would solve the problem. End of. We wouldn’t have increasing numbers of people going down with the disease. People are not isolating. They’re not social distancing. As was evidenced when John let them out of his her that night. So you know, take responsibility. Follow the rules. And let’s at least give them a chance to work. Helen you have been trying to get into the conversation. I would certainly like to echo that last point. The science here is actually quite straight forward. Now we understand coronavirus, it is behaving very predictably. Viruses do what viruses do and spread from person—to—person and the best metaphor I can think of. Think of a bottle of pop that’s been shaken. You start to unscrew the top, it comes out. You have to put the top back on. And if you’re going to live with this pressurised system, you’ve to release a little bit at a time if you’re going to deal with it. Then you can deal with it as it bubbles out. That is where local lockdowns and following the hands, face distance and space, test, trace and isolate have to come out. But you can’t miss out any of those steps. Every single one of us has a responsibility here and now. And it is absolutely right that we need our economy working, we need people working, work is good for health and health is good for work. These things go hand in hand. So we can’t think of them in isolation. So we need clarity of messaging, consistency of messaging and I get intensely frustrated that Hadrian’s Wall and Off-1’s Dyke are seen as some sort of barrier to viruses, they’re not. We need the same messages across the country, the science isn’t different. We should however recognise high areas of infection and low areas of infection do require differences, but we don’t require differences in four nations. Please can we get that clarity done and let’s get together as a nation now. This is a serious illness, it kills and it leaves a huge proportion of people ill for a long, long time. When they’re ill, they’re not working and contributing to society either. So that’s covered a few things there, Fiona. And Helen, when you hearJohn talking about the fact and we have seen stuff online about people getting together and having a party after 10 o’clock, what does that make you feel as a GP and someone representing a health care professional? It’s so frustrating, it’s sad it is frustrating, because It’s so frustrating, it’s sad it is frustrating, because I know people fundamentally want to do the right thing. But this pressurised system is a problem. There is pressure and people want release. But the release of everyone ending out on the street at the same time is not helping. So I’m sad and I’m frustrated and Ijust wanted to reiterate the messages, because the science is really simple. This virus isn’t getting less virulent, it’s not getting milder, it’sjust as deadly as it was on day one. But we are testing more, so we are finding more of the milder cases. Please, please, follow the rules. Look after one another. And we will get through this. But it’s not going to be over quickly. We’ve got a long haul ahead of us. We have got a few minutes left and I want to get one more question in from Gordon McGregor. Do you think the Government should help help football clubs financially when their players are still receiving massive salaries, compared to an average person’s wage? Right, well Alison, Carlisle United FC, which plays in League Two, is warning it faces a 1.2 million short fall and I’m thinking about obviously you have got Merseyside that’s going into, or the Liverpool area that’s going into restrictions, that is going to affect the clubs there too. Yeah, football clubs are in a really bad situation and you know we heard the pointjust about new players’ wages, which is one side of it. Which we have needed to regulate better and have a better system of governance in our national game for many years and the virus has shown this in sharp relief. Do you think the Premier League should dip into their pockets? I think the Premier League have got to contribute, but I think it’s bigger than that. The Government promised in their 2019 manifesto a fan—led review of football governance and the minister says he wants to include finances as well. Labour agree with this and I have been banging on about football finances and governance since I was first elected as a member of Parliament? 2010. That’s a lot of talk about football in ten years. So, what would Labour do now? We have written to the Government offering our principles for reviewing the regulations to make it better. Right now, if I was the ministerfor sport now, I would be getting the Premier League, the EFL and all the parties round the table and say, can we all stick to the principle that no football supporter in this country should lose a much—loved sports club, just because of the virus. Now we know that the finances of football have been, shall I say, challenging for a long time anyway. So we have got to separate out the changes that we need for the medium and the long—term viability of the game. Which is a way of protecting clubs in the short—term, if it is just the virus that will tip them over. Because I’ve seen you know whether it’s what happened with Macclesfield recently or what happened with Bury, I have seen how it impacts people, supporters when clubs go under. It’s part of your identity. It’s who you are and football supporters deserve much better than they’re getting at the moment. David? I support a League One club in Scotland which is not players on massive salaries and I think one of things that is really important for people to remember is, yes, there are big football clubs out there, players that are on big wages, but for the vast majority of communities, it’s small clubs, small teams that are really struggling at the moment. But one of the points that I was making in the House of Commons this week to the Government as well it is about being mindful, in my own constituents at Celtic football club, the biggest football club in Scotland. L111: But it is about making sure that peopla But it is about making sure that people remember there is a local economic aspect. A 60,000 seater stadium. What would you do to help stadium. what would you do to help the clubs stadium. What would you do to help the clubs lower down? We need to look at the financial support that is offered and the package that was brought forward by the Treasury is unadequate. I don’t think Rishi Sunak can get to Christmas without Sunak ran get to Christmas without looking at the Sunak can get to Christmas without looking at the packages, what he has offered is it not going to cut it for communities and clubs and people for communities and clubs and peopla who are for communities and clubs and people who are struggling. Stuart, are you a footy fan? Yes, I’m a who are struggling. Stuart, are you a footy fan? Yes, I’m 3 Spurs fan. a footy fan? Yes, I’m a Spurs fan. There is a a footy fan? Yes, I’m 3 Spurs fan. There is a deal in place and the argument is about the access of foreign players coming in. It is a three-way foreign players coming in. It is a three—way trade off. If they let three-way trade off. If they let more foreign three—way trade off. If they let more foreign players in, they will give the money to the EFL. But the industry needs to help itself. Because that gentleman said, the peopla at Because that gentleman said, the people at the top end have got a disproportionate amount of the income and the revenues. income and the revenues. Gem? Our [oral team income and the revenues. Gem? Our local team have suffered, but they [oral team have suffered, but they have kept local team have suffered, but they have kept most of the money that people have paid for their season tickets and they’re allowing their tickets and therre allowing their fans to tickets and they’re allowing their fans to watch it online. So they’re fans to watch it online. So therre maintaining fans to watch it online. So they’re maintaining some of the income and giving something back to if fans. giving something back to iffans. which giving something back to if fans. Which is good. It is a positive which is good. It is a positive step. Halon, Which is good. It is a positive step. Helen, you’re nodding? Yeah step. Helan, you’re nodding? Yeah this is a step. Helen, you’re nodding? Yeah this is a much wider issue than football clubs and football should support football, the richer clubs should support the other clubs, but we need to think of rugby and we need to think of mgby and cricket we need to think of rugby and cricket grounds and the facilities that are suffering. There are other sports out there, so let’s think about them all. And Grant, the Government has promised an emergency grant to the fifth tier of football, what about the rest of it. Will the Government pitch in or leave Government pitch in or leave to it the Premier League. The league has a lot to give, Carlisle are playing lot to give, (“artisla are playing Barrow lot to give, Carlisle are playing Barrow on Saturday. You have been swotting! They will need to be able to carry on playing, as has been said and we are looking at things like how you can use technology in like how you ran use technology in football like how you can use technology in football to help the clubs and audiences. But it is something that has been hard and I think the Premier League is a part of the solution, as well as Government and the taxpayer. Gordon, this was your question, what is your view? I think that the football clubs should be in a way, if you can demonstrate you a way, if you ran demonstrate you ran by social a way, if you can demonstrate you can by social distancing you can ran by social distancing you ran stop the can by social distancing you can stop the spread of the virus, the stadiums have all seated numbers and I think they should be allowed a certain amount of supporters to watch the game and that would be alleviate some of the pressure for the fans and the clubs. But the governing bodies should get together and I don’t think the Government should be involved. I also think the players have a responsibility as well. Some of these players, in the lower league ts they’re not earning lower league ts therre not earning as much, lower league ts they’re not earning as much, when we were furloughed and people were living off 80% of their people were living off 8096 of their wages, some people were living off 80% of their wages, some of them could live off 101: of wages, some of them could live off 10% of their wages. I do think it 1096 of their wages. I do think it needs to 10% of their wages. I do think it needs to be all the governing bodies need to get together. I don’t think the Government should be involved. Because it is not the Government should be involved. Because it is notjust football, Because it is not just football, there is Because it is notjust football, there is other sports and where they ran they there is other sports and where they can they should help the lower ran they should help the lower dubs. can they should help the lower clubs. That is my opinion. Grant it dubs. That is my opinion. Grant it is a dubs. That is my opinion. Grant it haum dubs. That is my opinion. Grant it is a rare thing clubs. That is my opinion. Grant it is a rare thing where people tell is a rare thing where peopla tell you the is a rare thing where people tell you the Government shouldn’t be involved. Enjoy that moment while it involved. Enjoy that moment whila it lasts. The point involved. Enjoy that moment while it lasts. The point about letting the lasts. The point about latting the spectators in lasts. The point about letting the spectators in the stadium, that is something we were hoping to move towards, but we have this you know absolute desire to have schools and work back and we can’t if the R rate is above 1 do other discretionary things. when is above 1 do other discretionary things. When we get it down, we can things. when we get it down, we ran do the things. When we get it down, we can do the other things that will help the clubs and other sports. Our hour is up. I see some of you have your hands up, we have run out of time. hands up, we have mn out of time. Our question, you hands up, we have run out of time. Our question, you came from Carlisle Our question, you came from (“artisla and next Our question, you came from Carlisle and next week we’re in Coventry and we are going to be and next week we’re in Coventry and we are going to bejoined by the we are going to be joined by the former we are going to bejoined by the formerfinance minister we are going to bejoined by the former finance minister of Greece. And an ex-Tory former finance minister of Greece. And an ex—Tory MP, Michael Portillo. And an ex-Tory MP, Michael Portillo. And the And an ex—Tory MP, Michael Portillo. And the week after that we are in Edinburgh with Edinburgh with Kate Forbes. If you live in those areas, get in touch and get involved in the debate and apply by going to the question time web—site. Adrian Chiles and chests web-site. Adrian Chiles and chests are on five web—site. Adrian Chiles and chests are on five live extra time. web—site. Adrian Chiles and chests are on five live extra time. You can are on five live extra time. You ran get in touch. But are on five live extra time. You can get in touch. But for now, thank you to the panel. Helen for get in touch. But for now, thank you to the panel. Helen forjoining us to the panel. Helan for joining us down to the panel. Helen for joining us down the to the panel. Helen forjoining us down the line. And of course thank you to our virtual audience of (artiste. you to our virtual audience of Carlisle. And thank you for you to our virtual audience of Carlisle. And thank you forjoining (artisla. And thank you for joining us as Carlisle. And thank you forjoining us as well. Until next time, bye-bye