Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, the social care Minister and former deputy chair of the Conservative Party, Helen whately. the Conservative Party, Helen Whately. Labour’s new Shadow whately. Labour’s new Shadow Secretary Whately. Labour’s new Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian Murray. john Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian Murray. John Swinney, Deputy First Murray. john Swinney, Deputy First Minister Murray. John Swinney, Deputy First Minister and Education Secretary for the SNP government, he Minister and Education Secretary for the SNP government, hejoins us Minister and Education Secretary for the SNP government, he joins us from Persia. layla the SNP government, he joins us from Persia. Layla McCay, a trained Persia. layla Md’ay, a trained psychiatrist Persia. Layla McCay, a trained psychiatrist who specialises in pub“: psychiatrist who specialises in public health. She is currently director of international relations at the NHS Confederation. And down the line from Edinburgh, Scotland editor of the Spectator magazine and columnist for the Scottish edition of the Times, Alex Massie. Good evening, welcome to my guest here and to my guest down the line, and I am delighted to say we have a live audience on the programme tonight throughout, it is almost going to be like old times, not quite, but we have got you virtually, all in Glasgow. I am so pleased you can Glasgow. I am so pleased you ran join us this Glasgow. I am so pleased you can join us this evening. And you can join us this evening. And you ran join join in at home on social media. Let’s start with our first question from Alison Goldie. Good evening, Fiona, good evening, panel. Given the success of track and trace, we rely significantly on the Government’s Government’s trust and the rules, Government’s trust and the mles, has this Government’s trust and the rules, has this been undermined in any way by the events of this last week? It feels like we have done nothing else but talk about the events of last week, of course Dominic Cummings. Ian Murray. Thank you for the question, Alison, it gets to the nub of how we get out of this epidemic, test, trace and isolate is the only “Y test, trace and isolate is the only way forward , test, trace and isolate is the only way forward, and in the last week, with the saga we have had with the Prime Minister, the Government, his integrity in tatters, we have seen it is one rule for the Prime it is one mle for the Prime Minister it is one rule for the Prime Minister and his team, it is one rule for the Prime Ministerand his team, and it is one rule for the Prime Minister and his team, and one rule Minister and his team, and one mle for the public. Minister and his team, and one rule for the public. We need every single member of the public to be absolutely in touch with these rules absolutely in touch with these mles and abiding absolutely in touch with these rules and abiding by them, otherwise we will never get to the end of this pandemic. The word trust, I think it should be called tax, test, trace, should be rallad tax, test, trace, isolate should be called tax, test, trace, isolate and trust. The Scottish Government has a big question to answer, because if you go back to the very start of this pandemic in Edinburgh, at a conference in a city centre hotel, and the public were not told about that. The reason it is such a difficult story for the Scottish Government is twofold, one, you need the public to be involved in this so that they can be used to in this so that they ran be used to help track and in this so that they can be used to help track and trace the people who help track and trace the peopla who have help track and trace the people who have potentially been infected, they need to trust in the system. And secondly, you need that trust from the public so you can use them to isolate and you can also use them to make their own choices about whether or not they see family members. So trust is the nub of how a track and trace system works. But given how critical you are of Dominic Cummings, saying it’s one rule for him and one rule for everybody else, why didn’t Labour ask for him to go? Well, Keir Starmer said very clearly, if he was Prime Minister, he would have sacked him... Yes, but he didn’tjoin the other parties in asking him to go. Well, I think when the Conservatives are tearing themselves apart over this kinds of issue, there’s now over 60 Conservative MPs who’ve publicly said that he should go, there’s over 70 that have e—mailed back their constituents, of which we’ve all had thousands of e—mails about this. The public are incredibly angry, and it goes back to Douglas Ross, thejunior Scotland Office minister resigned this week, and he said in his letter, and I think this is crucial, that many of the public have made huge sacrifices, including not being able to hold the hand of loved ones when they’re dying, and how could he possibly say to his constituents that they were wrong and Dominic Cummings was right? And I think that sums this issue up in a sentence. Layla, can I ask you, as the sort of scientific voice on our panel here this evening, do you feel that compliance may have been undermined by the events of the last few days? Well, it’s interesting, isn’t it? Because it’s not exactly about what Dominic Cummings did or he didn’t do — the question is really about what is the impact of that. And what we’ve heard from our members who are CEOs of hospitals, GPs, all across the health system, people are worried that public health messages are being undermined. They’re already hearing that people are making decisions they might not have otherwise made, and that’s really worrying, because in orderfor these public measures, whether lockdown, test, track and trace, any of these things to work, we need to have a really clear message that isn’t open to too much interpretation and discretion. And we need to have this public feeling that we’re all in it together. And I think that for those reasons, one of the hospital CEOs said to us recently that this could actually be one of the biggest risks to public health since lockdown began. So I think that all of these are key considerations as we think about what next. Alison, could I come back to you? Has it had any impact on whether you will be more or less compliant, as we’re going into test, track, or test and protect, or test and isolate now? Well, no, from a personal level, I would follow the guidelines. I think I’ve got enough integrity to do that. But I do think that it will have an impact on some people who are just fed up with the whole idea that someone can get away with something when the rest are not supposed to. Anyone on the panel think actually it really won’t make that much of a difference, that people will still do what they feel they need to do in the current circumstances? This is deeply unscientific poll. None of you are putting your hands up. Ah, yes, Eileen. Hi, Fiona, I believe that it undermines the message, like Alison said, but had it been an MP, he wouldn’t have got away with it. If it was anyone else with it, they wouldn’t have got away with it. The fact that this person is so close and so influential to Borisjohnson, that’s what rocks my confidence. What I’m asking you is whether or not you think it’ll make any difference in terms of compliance generally. Yes, it will. Like Alison said, the people with integrity out there, there’s people who do the right thing for society, for their family. There’s other people, like Dominic Cummings, looks for the loophole and looks for the cheap way. You’re cheating society by doing this. Ultimately, you’re putting lives at risk. Behaviour breeds behaviour, especially with someone so influential. Matthew, let’s hearfrom you. Just on that point, Fiona, Ithink, you know, with all due respect, Ian, to what you’ve said there, I mean, if I’m not mistaken, Stephen Kenny took it upon himself to go to his father’s place to sing Happy Birthday. I mean, he did it quite blatantly as well, quite literally in front of the cameras. So I think this... I mean, infairness, he said he was dropping off essential shopping for them that they couldn’t get, that’s what he said at the time. Yes, but it wasn’t done in an overly discreet fashion, you know, the filming of what happened there as such. And I don’t have any political allegiance one way or another, but I think the public, from what I can sense anyway, people I know are probably just a little bit fed up with the politicising of things as well. All we’re after is just, if we are all in it together, like the slogan says, that indeed those people in public life, like it or loathe it, you have to adhere to that, probably to a greater extent than the general populace because it comes with the territory, unfortunately. Alex Massie. Yes, I mean, look, Ithink... There were an awful lot of people all across the United Kingdom who, even if they haven’t necessarily voted for BorisJohnson or thought much of him, previously wished him well, they recognised it was important the Government had a grip on this crisis, rose to the challenge, rose to the occasion. And I think those sentiments were reinforced, obviously, when the Prime Minister fell ill himself. And the events of the last week, I think, has enormously dented public confidence in the UK Government’s ability to handle this crisis, because people have seen, and they have understood, and it’s been based on their own experience and the difference between the way they behaved and the way that, in this instance, Dominic Cummings has behaved, and they can tell the difference between these two things. Plenty of people, you know, you can sympathise with the predicament in which Dominic Cummings and his family found themselves, while recognising at the same time that many, many other people, hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of people, have faced comparable situations and they have obeyed the Government advice, followed the Government advice and stayed at home. And it’s not unreasonable to expect people at the highest levels of government to do likewise. And, you know, Ialso do think that this scandal, it has become a scandal, it started as a story, but the Government’s reaction to it has turned into a scandal, it has fatally wounded a lot of the messaging that is out there at the moment. It is entirely understandable in some ways that people will take the message that if there is one rule for government advisers and a different rule for the general public, that they will take the view that they will do their own thing too, regardless of what the official advice says. And the Government’s arrogant dismissal of this, the suggestion that it isn’t a story at all and that it’s time to move on, won’t do. I mean, you know, as as my colleague Esther Webber said in the Times the other day, you know, the problem with the "move on" idea is that the general public isn’t yet convinced that moving on is an essentialjourney. Keith, you’ve got your hand up. Yeah, I mean, I’m going to disappoint Alex here by saying, yeah, I think we should do exactly that, move on. I mean, for you political commentators and members of the opposition party, the Dominic Cummings story must be Christmas, your birthday, new year rolled into one, you must be loving it. I mean, Emily Maitlis has had to take the day off because of over excitement. I mean, yeah, move on. I can’t be bothered, I’ve got a mind of my mind, a mind of my own, you know, I know what to do and what not to do. What Dominic Cummings does or doesn’t do has no impact on me at all. And I’m more interested in whether there’s self—raising flour and eggs on the supermarket shelf than listening to Dominic Cummings stories. 50, Alex, yeah, let’s move on. Well, this will be music to your ears, Helen. Yeah, and Keith’s position is more what I’m beginning to hear coming through, that people feel that there’s been a lot of talk about what Dominic Cummings did or didn’t do. But actually what really matters is us having the pandemic under control and being able to get back to life that much nearer to... Is that what your constituents were saying to you when it first broke, this story? Well, of course, I’ve received e—mails from constituents, as every MP has, and Ian has done so, and I’ve received emails from constituents who talk about some of the sacrifices they’ve made and things that they have missed out on. And I don’t think we should suggest for a moment that lockdown is anything other than very hard. But that’s why what’s really important is that we now have the infection rate under control and falling, and that we’re in a position to ease some of the lockdown measures and launching the NHS Test and Trace, as referred to by Alison, because that is so important to continuing to keep under control. And are you worried that people may now... Some will take the view of Keith, you know, just move on and that’s it, it’s over, I won’t talk about it any more, and I’m sure you won’t be alone in that, Keith. I mean, others might be thinking, well, are there any loopholes here in this new system that we’re all being asked in England and in Scotland to adopt from today in terms of test and protect, or test and isolate? Because if there are any loopholes and it appears there were a few loopholes when it came to going all the way up to County Durham when we all thought we might have to stay at home, in fact, if there are any loopholes, should we hear about them now rather than perhaps find out later? Well, what we’ve seen so far is people really are consciously following the guidance. And in fact, the guidance has included recognising that some situations will be more difficult. For instance, if you’re looking after somebody who’s particularly vulnerable, you have a childcare situation... So if you have a childcare situation, then, Helen, since you mentioned it, if you have a problem with childcare and you happen to be one of the people who is identified as someone that has to stay at home for two weeks, you may not necessarily have to do. You clearly have to make sure that your child is safe, as any parent should do so. But for instance... So if you have to leave home to do that, even if you’ve been told to self—isolate, you can do that? Well, if you’re contacted because you’re a contact of somebody who’s got symptoms and told to isolate home, you should be able to do so with your child. And everyone will have their scenarios. But no, just to be clear, because it is important, because we all to have to adjust to this now, this new system. So if you are told to self—isolate at home for two weeks, either because you have symptoms or you’ve been in close contact, with someone has symptoms, but you have problems with that and you find that difficult because of childcare issues, you can behave otherwise, you don’t have to self—isolate? You should follow the guidance. But I don’t think anyone would suggest that you should do that, that you should have a child in an unsafe situation. So follow the guidance unless you can’t. No, that’s not what I’m saying, actually, at all. You should absolutely... You should follow the guidance. And that’s been the case all the way through. People should follow the guidance. But you’re saying unless... The guidance has always said that safety would be a factor and you should be clearly a responsible parent. But I mean, I think what’s really important is that people follow the guidance, and through doing that, that’s how we manage to keep the infection rate under control, and so life can get back to normal, or closer to normal, which would be so much better for everybody. Can I say to Keith...? Briefly. Keith is partially right, But why we haven’t moved on is because there’s been no apology, no contrition, and the doubling down on saying that you can drive 60 miles to test your eyesight. And Michael Gove’s touring television studios to say that’s allowable because he was preparing to go back to work is treating the public like fools, And that’s why people haven’t moved on. John Swinney. I think the whole issue for me comes down to the point that when Dominic Cummings made this journey, everybody was told you’ve got to stay at home, and the reasons why you were able to leave home were really, really, really limited. And quite clearly Dominic Cummings broke those rules to make the journey that he made, and Ian Murray is absolutely right — the ludicrous explanation that the thing you do when you’re worried about your eyesight is drive your car for 60 miles is just beyond credibility. So the worry I have about all of this is that it has that effect that you’ve talked about, that Alison talked about in her question, that it essentially undermines public confidence and public compliance. This has been a really difficult pandemic for any government to handle — it’s a challenge for us in the Scottish Government. But we saw polling information this week which demonstrated very, very high levels of public trust and confidence in the actions of the Scottish Government in how we have handled this crisis. Now, that doesn’t mean there’s not been hardship. It doesn’t mean that there’s not been suffering, but it means we’ve communicated clearly. We’ve had tremendous consent from members of the public to the measures that we’ve had to regrettably put in place. And I worry that the Dominic Cummings fiasco and the arrogance that’s been demonstrated by the Prime Minister and by Dominic Cummings and by all of the members, of the Cabinet in the way that they’ve expected us all to... John, sorry to interrupt, but it’s worth pointing out, isn’t it, that when there was a similar 3 similar issue in Scotland, when the chief medical officer who visited her second home, Caroline Calderwood, Nicola Sturgeon did let her go, but initially did try to hang onto her, as BorisJohnson is hanging onto Dominic Cummings. Well, when the story about Catherine Calderwood broke, the first thing that Catherine Calderwood did was apologise. She accepted that she had made a mistake, and the First Minister said that Catherine Calderwood had an important contribution to make to the Scottish Government about the clinical advice that we required. But the First Minister accepted, as did Catherine Calderwood, that the very act of her not following the rules that she had set out undermined those rules. So she resigned within 2A hours. Now, that was... So what was different here? Catherine Calderwood apologised. She accepted there was a potential damage to public consent and participation, and she resigned, and she did so with dignity. Dominic Cummings and BorisJohnson have behaved with arroagance and with disrespect to the public, and they have insulted so many members of the public who have suffered so many things, missed out on critical moments... 0K, 0K... ..the life journey of their loved ones, and that should be confronted. OK, I think it’ll keep Keith happy, we’re going to move on from Dominic Cummings. Let’s hear a question from Matthew, Matthew Denne. Track and Trace appears to be encountering delay issues in the rolling out process, both north and south of the border. Why is it that other nations around the world have managed to expedite these processes? And could the Scottish and the UK governments look to adapt using their successes rather than too much reinventing of the wheel? Are you referring to things like the app, for example, Matthew? There are apps already being used in Germany, South Korea and other countries, for example, whereas we are still trying to get ours going. Is that what you mean? Yeah, Ithink, you know, most reasonable people would concede the Asian countries in particular, whether it was swine flu or Sars, etc, you know, they’re probably ahead of the curve because they’ve gone through pandemics previously. So they’ve been able to adapt technology. But there’s plenty of other examples. Dare I say Australia, you know, one of the ones where they’ve been able to, you know, roll out this programme of track and trace with great speed from effectively ground zero. And when the World Health Organization said at the start the global pandemic, we need a joined up approach between nations, it almost feels like the UK government, reminds me of my father when I was little, and you’d get lost and he’d never ask for directions because he had a superiority complex about it. And it just feels that way with the UK at the moment. You know, don’t be afraid to ask for a bit of help rather than trying to go off on your own tangent. Well, Helen, let’s start with you. Let me just ask about the app actually, first. Where are we with this app? We know that the app will be brought forwards in due course. But the system that we have got in place today is drawing on over 25,000 callers who will be implementing... Because we were told by Matthew Hancock that the app was incredibly important and we don’t have it. So is itjust that it is not working? What’s happening with it? Just update us. So the app will support us as we go further down the path. But the important thing is that we’ve got to a point... I’m just trying to find out where we are with the app because it is... Is it not working? Are there technical problems? Just fill us in. I’m not personally working on the app. But the important thing is we have a system in place which we’ve been able to launch today, which means that it will support some of the easing of lockdown measures. And we have actually to pick up, when we do look at overseas and what other countries are doing, we do absolutely look to make sure that we draw on the best of what you see elsewhere. And we have also got to a point, though, that we can launch the NHS Test and Trace system because we’ve now got the number of cases and the infection rate under control. So we’re actually in a position that it will really work, to do the contact tracing and the isolating. And then, because we’re all getting to grips with how this is going to work. So if we develop symptoms, we contact one of these tracers, I’m not sure who we contact actually, but we contact somebody. So if you develop symptoms, you should go home and isolate and then you should order a test which you can do online or by phoning 119. So you inform 119 that you think you might have symptoms and you ask for a test. And then, if you test positive, you are asked to then supply details of who you’ve been in contact with. Correct. But what do you, without the app? What do you do about all the people you’ve been in contact with when you don’t know their name, their email address, their phone number? How’s that going to work? So people who you were on public transport with or in the shop with, the shopkeeper. So this goes hand in hand with social distancing. So for instance, if you’ve been keeping a social distance and being two metres apart, that wouldn’t count as a contact. No, but for people where you have been closer, you know, either in your workplace or perhaps because you go on public transport, without the app, how are you going to know who these people are, the people that we don’t have the details for? It’s important when you’re out and about that you’re following the social distancing rules... But sometimes, sometimes as the government has accepted, it’s not always going to be possible, particularly in a work environment. So when you don’t necessarily know all the people you’ve been in closer than two—metre contact with, without the app, how you’re going to find them? Well, I think you’ll find a lot of people will know people that they’ve spent sustained, close contact with. You would know about that. And that’s what you will talk through with the contact tracers so that they can then contact them and this is a system, this is a known way of dealing with a pandemic and controlling it. So, we’re not making this up. This is a system that is known to work. Are we ready, Layla? Well, it sounds as though we’re getting there with the human contact tracers, as has been discussed. Clearly, it’s only just launched. There are going to be operational issues as it starts to bed in. Hang on, we were told it was going be world beating on Monday by the Prime Minister. Well, I don’t think that anyone in the NHS needs it to be world beating so much as just really, really effective. And that’s what we’re hoping for. And at the moment, it’s just kicked off. We don’t yet know what it’s going be like, but we are strongly hoping that this is going to be a really effective way of working. The app question is interesting because of course, we were promised that the app would be here as part of that system. And in some ways we don’t need to be really distressed that it’s not there on day one because it’s only part of the system. It’s not the main part of the system. It’s an adjunct. It will be something that will improve our ability to find people who are at risk and make sure that they’re able to quarantine and be safe. But I think that this is really more of a challenge that we keep on being promised things are going to be here and then they’re not. And it’s part of what I was saying before about just eroding people’s confidence. The NHS has had lots of disappointments whether they’ve been you know, they’ve been promised PPE coming on a plane from Turkey and then it hasn’t come or they’ve been promised PPE that was going to work. And then suddenly it’s substandard in some way. There’s lots of expectations that are raised and then they’re dashed. And I think that what we’re hearing from health leaders is, promise things that you’re able to deliver when you’re able to deliver them. And that will really help to build staff confidence and help to build patient confidence. Ellen, you wanted to come in. Yes. Just taking up on that last point as well, there is a huge disconnect between what we hear on the daily briefings and the reality and the implementation of these policies on the ground, and having that confidence in the infrastructure can deliver what we’re being promised. And it’s really incomprehensible why the UK was so unprepared. I mean, countries like Turkey have been testing and tracking since the start with a relatively low death toll. And indeed, as you were saying in the panel, we were told we’d get a world heating system. But what’s being rolled out now is only the basics of what we should have expected weeks ago. We’re not testing asymptomatic cases. Tests are only available online. This should be available locally, I would have thought. And itjust appears that once again, the world has beaten us to it. Sean. I’m just wondering how useful this app will be. Dr Hannah Fry said in 2017 in a BBC pandemic, the biggest citizen experiment, she did of its kind, for the next pandemic like this, most of the things about coming out from that where about access to Wi—Fi, having the money to pay for Wi—Fi, Wi—Fi in your home, whether you have a phone that would be able to have this app and you’d be able to download it. My mum’s over 70 and I don’t know if she would be able to navigate something like that. David? Layla, I think you were being too kind there and being very easy on the Conservatives with your comment. Because the First Minister today, of Scotland, she said, she was reticent to announce the move from lockdown that we’re moving into in Scotland now. And I understand where she’s coming from, because we’ve got to a point now where for me personally, I have a lot more questions. I may not be her biggest fan, but coming out of every day and giving us the briefings she’s given us, and then for the Westminster parliament to do what’s happened over the last few weeks, and that mistrust. Nobody’s going to tell me that, I don’t want to talk about the Cummings incident, the height of government, the power they’ve got, things they could do, people could get things done. It’s not like anything else that’s ever happened. This pandemic is hitting at all, hitting us all hard. The trust is gone. And I don’t understand how you could sit there and turn around and say to us that we’ve got, to get the pandemic in control... To get the pandemic under control, you need the public on your side. And that’s not what we’ve seen from the Westminster government. Ruth. Hi, thank you, Fiona. My question is, this track and trace system, what happens if nobody volunteers themselves? My understanding is it’s a voluntary system. What happens if people don’t give their name, for example? What happens in that situation? How is that going to be handled? I mean, John Swinney, it’s an interesting point, actually, because obviously, if you do put yourself forward, A, if you suggest that you’ve got symptoms, you realise you’re going to be in quarantine for the next two weeks, and also, all the other people that you mentioned you’ve been in contact with, you know, for a sustained period of time or less than two metres, you’re effectively dobbing them in, if you like, and they’re going to have to self—isolate as well. So what, to Ruth’s point, because obviously you’ve got the same issue in Scotland as in England, what if people don’t put themselves forward? I think this is the link to the first question that we’ve just had. The recent why we’ve been successful in reducing the prevalence of coronavirus is because of massive volumes of public participation and compliance. And the same applies to the track, trace, isolate and support strategy, test and protect, that we’re putting out in Scotland. It relies on people coming forward where they have symptoms, indicating that they have those symptoms. And then for us pursuing the contacts, obviously they’ll be privacy applied to essentially the source of the virus that’s been drawn to the attention of other individuals. But it fundamentally relies on public participation, public trust and public confidence. And that’s why I really appreciate the comments that David made about how the First Minister has communicated about the challenges that are inherent in handling a pandemic. And we need to have that similar level of communication and consent from members of the public, in wrestling with the contact tracing strategy. It is a bit unfair to lay absolutely everything and Dominic Cummings’ door. I’m no apologist, but nonetheless, there’ll be other factors that might influence whether people want to comply in terms of can they afford to take the time off work, that kind of thing. Alex, Matthew’s question is why is it that other nations have managed to do this faster? And could the Scottish and UK governments have learned anything from these and therefore done it faster ourselves? Well, I think on the second part of that, the obvious answer has to be yes. And this is one of the many, many things that will be considered by the inevitable series of public inquiries that will follow the eventual conclusion of this emergency. You know, one of the ironies here is that, you know, one of the fiercest critics of what you might term the dysfunction of the British state or the Whitehall apparatus is one Dominic Cummings. He thinks that we need to fundamentally rethink, reimagine, reorganise the entire business of government. I happen to think that some of his diagnosis is quite persuasive. He is, of course, now in a position to do something about it. And he’s discovering that curing something is rather more difficult than diagnosing it. And I think that that is something that is a long—term challenge for the British state. You know, at the moment, in terms of how viable this contact tracing operation is going to be, an awful lot of that does depend on government communication. And that is one of the areas where I think we have seen BorisJohnson actually, you know, fail — and demonstrably so. He does not give the impression of being on top of his brief. He does not inspire public confidence. And that is a significant feeling at a time and in a crisis where communication, clarity and consistency of communication are, if not half the job, then certainly a significant proportion of the Prime Minister’s job, or First Minister’sjob, or anybody in a leadership position at present. 0K, Helen, do you want to respond to that? Well, actually, one thing I want to pick up is that the success of the next phase does rely on people being... absolutely being responsible and coming forwards and booking the test. Just in terms of what Alex was saying, BorisJohnson failing as a communicator. I actually think he’s an excellent communicator and also very effective at motivating the troops. But I do think, I know that you can, of course, criticise any stage of the pandemic, if only this or if only only that, but also that actually extraordinary things have happened. Extraordinary things have been achieved. A huge growth in the volume of testing at incredible pace, given... We have got the second highest death toll in the world in absolute numbers. So, I think, I think we should... We are absolutely looking at what other countries are doing. I think one thing we do know is, is that now is not the moment where we can actually really compare those kind of things between different countries. But the important thing is that every life lost is somebody who we mourn and with sadness. But we also need to make sure that we are able to move on and keep the infection rate under control and try and begin to get life more in the direction of normal now. Ian. Well, Ithink, Fiona, one of the key features of this whole pandemic has been the lack of a coordinated international response. And I’m tempted to say at this point, could viewers in Scotland please turn over to BBC Two? Please don’t, if you don’t mind! We can’t even get the four nations to work together. So the explanation that Helen gave at the very start of her answer to this question is different in Scotland. It’s going to be different in Wales and different in Northern Ireland, and why we don’t have coordination across the UK is one of the big questions that people keep asking. And let’s not forget, and Layla’s absolutely right, the reason we are so far behind in international terms on this track and trace is because we abandoned that as a principle back in early March, and have only come round to realising that’s the only way out of this. And the key elements of that, if I canjust finish on this point, you have to test, test, test. This goes all the way back to what the World Health Organization said in January. England has a dreadful testing record, and you’re going to have to do at least a quarter of a million a day to get anywhere near this being proper. And that’s what we’ve been calling for. And Scotland has one of the worst testing rates in the entire world. Until that’s resolved, this system cannot operate properly to keep people safe. John. John Swinney, do you want to come back on it? Well, we’re now in the situation where Scotland has the capacity to do 15,000 tests on a daily basis. But you’re not doing anything like those numbers. Sorry to interrupt, but you’re not doing anything like those numbers. 15,000. Well, we’ve got capacity in place to now do that, when it’s at the most critical moment when we’ve suppressed the virus. And we have the capacity to do the contact tracing. We’ve got the communications in place to set that out. We’ve had that in place at the critical moment where we begin to relax some of the great restrictions that have been in place. So the strategy has come together in exactly the right timing to make sure that we have the capacity in place to provide the support that individuals in the country require. Just to be clear, John, what’s stopping you reaching that capacity? What’s stopping you reaching the capacity? You’ve got capacity for 15,000 tests, for example, and you’re doing nothing like those numbers. Well, we’re constantly expanding the range of individuals who are able to get tests. So, for example, we are doing a great deal more availability of testing within care homes. We have mobile testing services moving around the country. We have much more capacity available for people to go to to get particular tests. We’ve got availability in place for key workers and for home care workers and for those delivering services, so a whole range of different areas where we’ve expanded the capacity and the eligibility to make sure that individuals can get the tests requirement. 0K. Ian, very briefly. The epicentre of this pandemic is in our care homes in Scotland. Over half of all the deaths are now in care homes, and 46% of all deaths are in care homes in Scotland. We are still not testing care home patients. We’re still not testing on a regular basis care home staff. And you can’t talk about capacity. You have to talk about test delivery. It’s simply not happening yet. Yes, we are. We’re doing all that, Ian. Not with the care homes that get in touch with me daily, whose patients, residents and staff are not being tested. Alex, you wanted to come in. Sorry, there’s two Alexes. I’m confusing things greatly. My question is, without the antibody, the fact that people know they’ve already been infected, how is this trace and trace going to work? Am I going to have to self—isolate over and over again? If I come into contact with someone once, am I going to have to take 1A days off? If I come into contact with someone else, do I take another 1A days off? People who are self—employed and other people are not going to be manage that, it’s not going to be possible for people. I mean, this is the tricky thing, isn’t it? Because, as Alex is saying, you might have to self—isolate more than once. And let’s just remind ourselves what that means. That means, for example, if you have to share a bathroom with your family, you have to use it a different time, and then you have to wipe it all down. I think you put your rubbish in several bags when you put it out. I mean, you have to keep away from your entire family and you might have to do this several times. We’re not asking people to isolate within their households. So you’re not worried about if they infect their family? If you’re being asked to... I should distinguish between if you’re being asked to isolate if you’ve got symptoms. If you’re being asked to self—isolate at home with your... We’re not asking anyone in the household to isolate. But it’s during that period where you are in the possible incubation period to see whether you might contract the virus. And I recognise that there is a risk that you might be asked to do that more than once, but if people follow social distancing... So if people are following social distancing and minimising their contact, so if they’re having to go to a workplace to work, but social distancing in the workplace is really important, because that’s how you avoid becoming somebody who’s a contact of the sort that needs to isolate. In England, you can go to barbecues now, I think in Scotland, correct me if I’m wrong, you can’t. You can. Yes, you can. You can go to a barbecue. Yes, because two households, no more than eight people. It’s no more than eight people, six in England, two households can meet, socially distance, in public or private outdoor spaces. So you could have a barbecue. This is how ridiculous this whole situation is. It’s eight in Scotland. It’s six in England. Why can’t we just get a UK—wide approach and everyone works together? And also a barbecue all keeping two metres distance, that’s going to be quite... I mean, that’s a heck of a garden you’re going to have to have to accommodate that. For no more than 15 minutes. We’re asking people to gradually... It’s small steps to try and make life be a little bit better. We’re alljust trying to make sense of exactly how it works since we’re going to have to be doing this. Jeanette, you just wanted to come in. Let me bring you in. I work from home. This track and trace has the ability to close my business down every single week. And I don’t know what I’m going to do. I’m already closed. Financially, it’s been a nightmare. And now, if any of my staff or any of my family, or they go into any of the houses to clean or do anything, we’re closed. And I was wondering, who is going to pick up the pieces for me? Because we know the small businesses who work from home have already been missed out on everything. And now we’ve got track and trace that could close me down again every single week or have girls going off sick because they’ve been to vulnerable houses, vulnerable places. And they’ve been doing theirjob and Ijust don’t know what to do. Is the Government going to sort this out? You run a cleaning company, don’t you, Jeanette? You’ve got various people going out to clean up people’s homes. 50, John Swinney, what is the compensation package going to be? I mean, so if you are someone... Either you’re Janette, who runs a company or you’re someone who works with Jeanette and a lot of small companies are in a similar position. They suddenly get either they get symptoms. You’ve got to self—isolate for the next 1A days and let’s see what happens. What compensation will there be for them? I think the point thatJeanette makes, it illustrates the fact that there has to be ongoing support arrangements in place for individuals and for businesses to make sure that people can navigate their way through what’s going to be a difficult period, if they have to participate in contact tracing. So what will they be, John, very specifically? Because the provision for the self—employed, for example, come to an end in about three days. People working forJeanette are self—employed. So what provision will be put in place for them? That’s what I was coming onto. There has to be a need for an ongoing scheme of support to assist individuals in that respect. Which is why we continue to press the UK Treasury to recognise this is not a short—term issue. This is a long—term issue that we’ve got to see sustained. The indications from the Treasury are, for example, on the furlough scheme, that’s going to be constrained in August by the Chancellor. And that’s a very damaging move, because we know that the implications of Covid are going to be with us for a long time. So we’re appealing to the UK Government to recognise the longevity of this problem and put in place the support to enable that to be the case. 0K, well, we’ve got Helen Whately here, John, so let’s ask her. So someone inJeanette’s position, very specifically, self—employed, that comes to an end in the next few days, what will the Government do for people like her? So, I don’t... On this I agree withJohn, and the importance of having the support for people who, for instance, are required to isolate because of test and trace. It’s up to the UK Government. 50 what are you going to do? And I know that that must be something that the Chancellor specifically to look at is on the self—employment question. We know that for those who are employed, they will be eligible for statutory sick pay. If they are asked to isolate. For someone inJeannette’s position specifically, she’s come on the programme this evening saying, what are you going to do for people like me? What is the Government doing? I can’t pre—empt what the... The decision of the Chancellor will make on that. But it is absolutely true that we do need to make sure that people are able to afford what they need in life and recognise the costs of this. Also that we do need to have something which is economically sustainable. So we need to have a way to be beginning to restart the economy because of the huge amount of economic support that has gone to those who are in employment, those who own businesses across the economy, a huge amount of support. We now need to get the economy back up and running. And more people going back to work. Well, I’m sure Janette will wait with great interest to see what comes out. As the Prime Minister said today, we will look after everybody locally who was affected by this. So let’s see what happens. Let’s hear now from Rena Cuthbertson. Rena. Good evening, Fiona, good evening, panel. Was the policy indecision regarding the emptying of hospital beds with the patients not being tested and the outrageous consequences on elderly citizens a planned arrangement? And if so, does this not highlight the lack of value and respect that we place in the elderly? So was it a planned arrangement allowing people back into care homes without being tested? And does it highlight the lack of value and respect? Yes, Alex. Alex Massie. The care home situation I think is one of those areas where governments in all parts of the United Kingdom faced a terrible set of choices. You know, in hindsight, as Nicola Sturgeon said this week, they would probably make some decisions differently. You know, at the time when people were released from hospital into care homes, it was... They feared that the NHS and the hospitals were going to be overwhelmed with Covid cases. And so, you know, what do we do with people who are, you know, delayed discharge, bed blocking, whatever? Well, get them out, almost regardless of their circumstance. And that now, because the sort of tsunami of Covid cases didn’t quite materialize, that now looks to be a terrible mistake. And obviously, with hindsight, it was a mistake. But at the time it was made, I think it’s reasonable for politicians to say, well, but this was the choice that we had available to us. But you can only do that, I think, you can only get the public to trust you if you communicate with candor. If you allow that mistakes will be made in a fiercely complicated and unprecedented set of situations. But you can’t just allow that mistakes that will be made. You have to actually sort of admit to them and take ownership of them as well. If you treat it, if we treat people like adults, there is a chance that they will understand the position you’re coming from. But you can’t just sort of deny that any mistakes took place. And it seems to me to be infantilizing the government’s, of government ministers wherever they happen to be to try and pretend that that could be the case. You know, people understand that this is a really, really difficult situation to manage. And that’s why even though patience may be beginning to wear thin, I think there is still a residual degree of goodwill of the government, if government can can be shown to be responsive to this situation, can show that it is accepting and taking ownership of mistakes and the care home situation is clearly one of them. You can’t go around prattling on about how, you know, thrown a protective ring around care homes at the same time, as, you know, thousands and thousands of people are dying in care homes. And the final point of the question there, you know, it is clear, I think, that for a long, long time, care homes have been sort of overlooked, too often forgotten part of the whole health and social care network, and that sometimes perhaps seen as a convenient place to park people whose presence elsewhere might be deemed undesirable or too complicated. Let’s hearfrom Elaine in the audience. You’ve had your hand up for a short while. Hi, Fiona. I agree with Alex. I think at the start of this pandemic, it was a tsunami and no one really knew what they would do. And I think the choice when we saw those horrific images from the Italian hospitals of patients lying in corridors, couldn’t catch a breath, I think the right decision was made at this time to make sure the hospitals were clear that we wouldn’t have those images in front of our newspapers. And I think Nicola Sturgeon has looked back, like Alex said there, and thought, you know, in hindsight, she probably would have done things differently. I think the choice at the time of having that tsunami of patients, you know, with Covid, versus letting elderly patients go into a care home where they probably thought that was going to be a safer place for them at the time and was probably... It was a lose—lose choice now that we look back but at the time, we were trying to get away from those images of what we were seeing all over the press with people not being able to have a hospital bed. And we didn’t, it didn’t come to that, which is a good thing. So I think it is a lose—lose, it’s an unfortunate situation. Rena, you wanted to come back in, you asked the question? Yes, thanks very much. I think in terms of the planning, you know, we have known about this since the end of December. ﬂ I know it’s not a long time but what has been clear from the start, the most has been clear from the start, the most vulnerable in the communities are the elderty. most vulnerable in the communities are the elderly. And we let the are the elderty. And we let the people -- are the elderly. And we let the people —— people leave hospital peopla -- peopla leave hospital without people —— people leave hospital without being tested and put them in rare without being tested and put them in care homes. We put them back in their own homes, to be cared for by home care workers or by support agencies or by family. And nobody was tested. And so I knew there was tough decisions, and I’m no’ just talking about the Scottish Government, I mean generally right across the UK. And I know we were flooded with pictures, you know, but maybe if the cameras were in and out the care homes, we would be flooded wi’ as many pictures of people dying in care homes horrendously. Ijust think, you know, there’s no winners in this. And I know it’s been difficult, and I know that the whole thing is new to us, and Ijust think they’re the most vulnerable and they are always, I feel, the first to be forgotten. You know, we clap and we applaud Captain Tom, and many of his generation have just been left to die in care homes, and Ijust think it’s outrageous. And I thinkjust the other thing, Fiona, to say is every time the Conservative member speaks, all we hear is, well, you know, we cannot compare ourselves to the countries, let’s put the Dominic Raab to bed, let’s not talk about anything that’s showing us up to be, you know, the unorganised, em... 0K, Helen, I’ll give you a chance to respond to that in a minute, but thank you, Rena, for that, I’m not trying to cut you off there. In terms of what Rena is saying, what Alex’s saying as well, Nicola Sturgeon saying, you know, with hindsight, which of course is a wonderful thing, I might have done things differently. When it comes to care homes, specifically asking you, what would you have done differently? I think the circumstances that have been narrated by all three of the comments that have spoken, I can’t do it disagree with their analysis. At the time that Covid was coming towards us, we realised and we thought the best thing to do was to ensure that older people who were being accommodated in hospitals when there was no clinical need for them to be there would be better protected in care homes, because if there was an influx of Covid cases into hospitals, where vulnerable elderly people were, the danger of cross—infection was very high, so the judgment was, if it was safe to do so, if the risk assessment was undertaken, those individuals could be accommodated either at home with support or in a care home. And there’s been constant political pressure on us to reduce delayed discharges in hospitals, to get all the people out of hospitals and into care homes situations. So we followed that approach. But, of course, we have discovered just how brutal Covid is to older members of our society and our community. John, sorry to interrupt, but surely we could see from the other countries quite how brutal coronavirus was to the older generation — that evidence was already there. Yes, but my point is that we judged that the best and safest way to support those individuals was in a care home setting or at home with support, rather than the hospital setting, which would be the epicentre of handling coronavirus cases. 0K, well, let mejust turn to Layla for a moment, because hearing what Alex Massie’s saying, whatJohn’s saying, I mean, there were other countries before us grappling with this, and they admitted people from hospitals back into their homes, but in some cases in some country, they put them into quarantine, special places or quarantine within care homes. Is there anything we could have learned from that, reasonably, or is Alex right, that actually, you know, this is the best we could have done in the circumstances? It’s incredibly hard to say. I look at all what other countries have done, and as you say, there’s been some sort of quarantine centres or interim places to go. It’s not exactly clear. I mean, obviously, what has happened with Covid—19 in care homes has been an absolute tragedy. But the reasons for that are not quite as clear cut as sometimes people are assuming. So we hear people say, oh, it’s because everyone was sent out of hospital. But actually, when you look at the data, it’s not totally clear that that was something that has created this challenge. You think it might have spread in care homes anyway? Well, that’s the thing. I mean, at the end of the day, we don’t know when this first started circulating. It looks as though when you started testing has a real impact on this. Looking at other countries and care homes, it looks like people going in and out of care homes, potentially, of course, playing its role, and while we really, really want an answer to that, it’s too early to figure out what’s going on. But we can see that we’d need an answer, and we need to learn, and I guess that what I’d say is that this, it really exposes the underinvestment and the undervaluing of social care for successive governments. And what we really need here is a bit of a long—term plan. We’ve seen what’s going on in social care, and it’s really great that the Government is now, you know, giving some money towards social care to say, goodness, we need to bolster, for example, your infection control mechanisms. Our members have been telling us for ages that while hospitals are starting to get PPE in, care homes have been in a much worse position, there’s a lot of disparity here. So there’s new funding so that care homes are able to get better infection control processes in place and things like that. But that’s a short—term fix, and when we look at this, we think, goodness, the moment is here for social care reform. And what are we going to do about it? What’s the Government going to do about it? Ian. Well, I think the chronic underfunding of social care across the United Kingdom and in Scotland, the chickens are now coming home to roost. And this was a problem under Labour governments as well. It’s been a problem for a long time. But we need some kind of political consensus to fund social care. We’ve been talking about this now for too long. But let’s go through what we already knew. We knew that the prevalence of this disease was in older people, it was much more severe in older people. We knew from the 2014 report and task force for social care that there was 3A recommendations, very few of them were implemented in Scotland. We knew in 2015 that the Government and the Scottish Government had said they would eradicate bed blocking — it wasn’t done. We knew from the Silver Swan report there was a problem with PPE and a problem with testing if we had a global pandemic. All of that has since happened, and the decision was made by the Scottish Government to move 912 elderly people from hospital to care homes. Now, that in itself is a big decision, and it’s a decision I completely agree withJohn, these big decisions have to be made. But the key thing here was that we’re taking from hospital to care homes without testing. So we’re essentially exporting the disease on the people that it affects the most into care. We have just heard Layla say that we can’t be sure that that was the critical deciding factor in terms of exponential growth. Well, 46% of all coronavirus deaths in Scotland have been in our care homes. This is the epicentre of coronavirus. And that’s why, because we sent people there without testing, we sent people there without the lack of PPE. And the figures, you looked at them earlier. Scotland does have one of the worst testing rates in the world, And the biggest problem with that is trying to get testing into the social care sector. We’re only doing between 4—6,000 a day, so how can we possibly protect the residents and the staff in care homes without fundamentally testing them regularly and making sure that they are safe? Helen, let mejust bring you back to Rena’s original question, which is, was the policy a planned arrangement, putting patients in care homes from hospitals who hadn’t been tested? And does it highlight the lack of value and respect we place on elderly citizens? So every step of the way, the Government followed scientific guidance on what to do, and clinical guidance and... Hang on, there was also government guidance, so April the 2nd, the UK Government guidance was negative tests are not required for asymptomatic elderly patients prior to transfers into care home. That was government advice. Government guidance was informed by the science and by the scientific guidance, but what has happened over time is, of course, that we have learned. So, for instance, we’ve learned, and the world has learned, that actually we have a situation with people who may be asymptomatic carriers of the virus. And it’s particularly hard, we now know, with older people who don’t display the most common set of symptoms. So there’s a particular reason, which is why we’re now doing testing of all staff and residents in care homes for older people, those with dementia, exactly to do that, to pick up those who may be asymptomatic, as well as those who have symptoms, because we’re learning. Butjust to go back and pick up on some of the comments from the audience, I mean, some really, really thoughtful comments. But one thing I will say is that when I became the care minister on February Mth, and since then, I mean, so much of my time and so many people in government has been on how we can support social care, both care homes and home care through the pandemic. And we know it’s really hard. One of the things that we saw early on was looking at Spain, and the situation where the army went into care homes where they’d been abandoned and people had just been left, and left to die, even from neglect. And we’ve put in place a new reporting system, so we know what’s going on in care homes. So we get a picture of where there might be risks of that. I should also say, and I talk so much to care homes, that we should recognise that in England, over 60% of care homes have not had a Covid outbreak. So actually, lots of care homes have managed to do an amazing job in keeping Covid out of their care homes. And many of those have had it now recovered from that outbreak and things are getting better. John Swinney, you wanted to come in, we’re almost out of time, so briefly, Ijust want to let you have another word. I think the point I wanted to make was that in Ian’s last answer, he talked about the need for there to be measures to tackle delayed discharges, and then when the Government tackles the issue of delayed discharge, we get criticised for it by Ian Murray. There are really difficult decisions that have to be taken here, with the best interests of the population at heart. Tough decisions in tough circumstances. And many of the measures we’ve taken have supported care homes to make sure that individuals have had the resources and the equipment and assistance in place to make sure they were kept safe in very difficult circumstance. OK, I’m afraid, I know you want to come back in, but our hour is up. Eleanor, I can see you’ve got your hand up there and we’ve run out of time, so forgive me for not coming to you. Tonight our questions came from Glasgow, and thank you so much to all of you. Next week, we will have an audience, a virtual audience from Southampton, and after that from Cardiff. So from now on, we’ll be looking for 12 people to join our discussion in the way that we have tonight via video link. in the way that we have tonight via video link. So if you’d like to be part of that, and I really hope that you will, and you come from either of those areas, do get in touch via the usual way and then we will get back in touch with you. And of course, if you want to continue the discussion, you can join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time, and that is on 5 Live right now. But I just want to say thank you very much to the panel for coming into the studio tonight, and of course thank you, John and Alex, forjoining us down the line. And thank you very much to our guinea pigs this evening, first time we’ve done this, joining us from Glasgow, I’m very grateful to all of you. And of course, you at home for watching. From Question Time, bye—bye.