Hello and welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel we have: Oliver Dowden, former policy adviser under David Cameron, elected as an MP in 2015, currently BorisJohnson’s Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Labour’s Shadow Foreign Secretary — she left Jeremy Corbyn’s front bench in 2016 and ran for the leadership of the party eartier this year, Lisa Mandy. Mathematician, author, senior lecturer at University College London, and presenter of TV programmes on a range of issues from coronavirus to climate change, to finding love online — Hannah Fry. Joining us tonight to help us discuss the American election, a former vice president of the Republicans Overseas, psychologist and chief executive of a strategy firm, Jan Helper—Hayes. Simon Wilson, boss of the fashion and homewares chain Next, where he has worked for nearly 30 years. He has donated to the Conservative Party in the past and currently sits as a Conservative peer in the House of Lords. And joining us down the line from Mexico, former Hollywood actress, author and Time Magazine’s Person of the Year in 2017 for her role in the Me Too movement, Rose McGowan. APPLAUSE. Good evening, welcome to my panel here in the studio, thank you forjoining us. And thank you very much to Rose and Jan, who are joining us down the line, and to our audience tonight, our virtual audience. You all come from Lewisham, orthereabouts, in south—east London, an area I know very well as I went to schooljust round the corner. Very good to see you. And welcome, of course, to you at home. Thank you very much for watching, and dojoin in the conversation the usual way, at BBC Question Time on social media. Right, let’s get our first question, which is from Tom Adams. Good evening, panel. Whether Trump wins or loses the Presidential election, he has gained many more votes overall than 2016. Does this show that his message resonates more than ever with the American people? Lisa? Igu es ' slmup? Ah, I was going to... Well, you will be up in a minute, Jan, or you can kick us off, if you like. You’re chomping at the bit, let’s hear from you. Well, yes. The thing is that the pollsters said that there was going to be a blue wave and we were going to lose seats. Instead, the support for Trump has gone... We call it going down ballot, and it has had a wide impact. Right, yes, he’s certainly... Lisa, it’s a fair point that Jan makes, that the polls were showing that Biden was going to win reasonably easily. That’s not happening at the moment. We still don’t know who’s going to win, of course, but Trump has increased, more people have voted for Trump this time than they did last time. Yeah. I think what this has shown is that America is a very deeply divided country. The 2016 election revealed huge divisions in American society and my impression from the turnout figures, Joe Biden is on course to win more votes than any presidential candidate in history, but Donald Trump has also increased the number of votes that he’s got. The impression that I get from the results that are filtering in is that those divisions now are deeper than they were four years ago. It’s been a very, very difficult time in American politics. And what does that say about the appeal of the left in America? I think what it says is that we’ve had a president over the last four years who has sought to stoke division rather than calm those tensions and we’ve seen a lot of that sort of politics, that populist style of politics, seeping over here to the United Kingdom. Don’t forget, of course, thatJoe Biden once famously described Boris Johnson as a political and emotional clone of Donald Trump and we’ve seen those attempts by this government as well, to stoke those tensions, to start culture wars and we’ve had a very, very angry, divided debate over Brexit as well. But the thing is, Trump has appealed to people? Well... There’s no getting away from that. It’s easier to win votes by stirring people up against one another than it is to calm a situation. I think what this tells us is that ifJoe Biden wins, as he’s expected but not guaranteed to do, then he is going to have a very, very difficultjob on his hands because he has to unite the American people and hold them together through what is widely expected to be the worst global economic downturn in a century. That is a huge challenge and that is why I said this week that Britain has to really step up now. Repair those relationships with the Democrats, who are seriously concerned about some of the actions of the British Government recently and play our part in helping to make sure that we do pull together. The director—general of the World Health Organization said recently that the biggest challenge that we now face, globally, is not the virus itself but the lack of solidarity — at both global and local levels. So, there is a huge amount of work to do in Britain has to play its full part. So, Rose McGowan, the question is, does the fact that Donald Trump has gained more votes than he did in 2016 show that his message resonates with more of the American people? I think it’s a little more complicated than that. It’s not, you know... I used to be a Democrat. I’m not a Republican. I’m kind of in a no men’s [and but I grew up in a very unusual way in Italy, in what they calla cult. And what I’ve seen now on both sides is just that. You know, one side thinks the other’s a cult, the other side thinks the other’s a cult and the answer is that it’s both. The answer is that the New York Times, they think they might be more erudite in telling you that Hillary’s going to win so everyone’s shocked but it’s not really reality. And the thing is, is that with the council culture thing —— culture thing on the left, which I’ve been a victim of, I’ve been cancelled many times, but the thing of it is, is thatjust by not saying bad words orjust by thinking a certain way doesn’t make it that you’ve actually accomplished anything. You know, the party line when I was a Democrat that I was always fed was we could accomplish so much if the Republicans wouldn’t stop us. Now, I was a lobbyist in DC, I saw behind—the—scenes. A lot of them are incredibly similar and incredibly tight, the left and the right. Donald Trump is... His message isjust, you know, this isn’t working. He doesn’t do it well, he doesn’t speak well, in my estimation, but he’s appealing to people that are tired of being lied to. Now, he lies as well. So it’s very confusing but, in a weird way, he’s a very sepia, transparent liar. When he does lie, we can see it. Whereas the other ones, they hide it much better. And I don’t think it’s as easy as we need to join hands and sing Kumbaya. There’s a lot going down in the US and it’s, frankly, it’s a weird opinion but it needs to happen and it’s very sad but this is two sides, they’ve been lied to for so long, that it’s very hard to see the truth any more. There’s some hands up amongst our audience. Alex? I was going to agree there with Rose. I think it’s very easy to win votes when you are not held to account for what you’re saying. I mean, we’ve seen even in the past 2A hours, Trump and his party claiming to have won elections that they haven’t and there don’t seem to be any consequences for that. I think, again, that’s seeping into British politics, where people aren’t held to account for what they say. There just doesn’t seem to be any regulation of people’s claims in the past, so it’s easy to win votes when you just say what people want to hear and they never have to follow up on them. Exactly the same point as Alex. I think there’sjust so much misinformation out there and we are not all starting at the same base, with the same truth. People have so much news from social media and we don’t know what’s truth and what’s lies. So I think it’s just really important to regulate, again, what Alex said, so people are not allowed to say kind of lies and things like, you know, world beating test entry —— and trace system when they’re not. And, Simon, when you talk to people who support Trump, as Jan does, many will say, well, that’s patronising to us. We know what we’re voting for, we know what we’re hearing and we like it and don’t tell us that we’re just being taken in. Clearly, we don’t know how this election is yet going to turn out but what certainly has not happened is that Biden is not romping home and Trump has not been beaten into a corner. Yeah, look, I don’t know a huge amount about what the people in America are thinking. Lisa seems to be far more connected to the entire American nation than I am but it does amaze me that Trump has done so well. I think the question we’ve got to ask is really about the political class in America and, potentially, about our own political class. We have to remember that Tmmp isn’t a rareer politician. He came from outside of politics. How has he managed to break into this world and become president? The answer, I think, comes down to the lack of connection between the political class and what people are thinking. And part of that, I think, is that we have moved into a world where people just aren’t prepared to speak their mind. There’s just this lack of authenticity, this fear... Well, you can’t say that of Donald Trump, surely? That’s right. That’s one thing he does do. No, that’s exactly right and I think that is the only way I can explain his success, is that he... You know, love him or hate him, and I have to say, I would not vote for him, but he is authentic. He is speaking from the heart, he is speaking his mind. He doesn’t care what he says, he doesn’t care about the consequences and I think that overly cautious approach that political classes around the world are beginning to take and the sort of half answers that they’re forced to being given, to give, means that people like Trump can suddenly break through because they’re prepared to speak their mind. I think it has to be a wake—up call to our own political class to say, come on, speak your mind, stop following the party line, stop just saying what you think you want us to hear, tell us what you really think. Well, we’ll be coming to you for that, Oliver, in a minute. Tom? I broadly agree with what Simon said there but I think what we should be looking at is Trump’s messaging has been all around he’s the protector of the American people, he’s America first, he’s the protector of the economy, he’s there for the average American. But I think what’s happened is he’s connected 3 lot of those things with fear, the things he says around the fact that if Biden wins there’ll be riots and pitting different groups against each other, such as immigrants and portraying them as threats and generally acting like a bully and being really divisive. But I think what concerns me more is the fact that how easy is that division to unpick, even if Trump loses and Biden wins, are we ever going to get back to a point in America where there’s less division and at a much better point? Natalie? I was going to say, I think with Trump, I’m no fan but I think he’s very clever. He’s a charismatic character. He knows his audience really, really well. He knows how to deliver that message that’s going to land with them and he’s got a lot of loyal supporters. So, I’m really not surprised that a lot of people have really turned out to vote for him this time. 50, Hannah, the question is, whether Trump wins or loses, and at the moment he’s not looking on track to win but we still don’t know, does the fact that he’s attracted more votes show his message still resonates with the American people? I certainly think that when you’re sitting on this side of the Atlantic, it is extremely surprising that tens of millions of people could possibly vote for Trump. I mean, I’ve got some basic expectations from a president. Don’t make fun of disabled people, you know, don’t solicit foreign interventions, that kind of thing. I mean it’s really surprising, you know, I accept that. But I think wondering why voters in America didn’t make the right choice, as it were, is kind of the wrong question. Well, that wasn’t the question. That isn’t the question. No, I mean more as in the fact that people are surprised, it sort of implies that we’re wondering why people didn’t make a different decision and I think that in a way that’s not the right way to think about things because essentially, you know, you’ve got all these people who are overlooking concerns on sexual assaults, concerns on... Basically, playing fast and loose with the Constitution and still choosing him and I think... Why do you think they are? Well, I think it’s not about whether people couldn’t be persuaded. I think it’s about people not feeling like they’re represented. I think there are a lot of people in America who are very deeply unhappy. There’s lots of studies that show this. There’s a study that demonstrates that well—being in America has been declining for 25 years, particularly in prime age white men who have lower educational outcomes. I mean, there are things like, you know, opioid deaths, suicides, alcohol use — all of that is in this group of people who are also Trump voters. I think unless you get to the core of what it is that people are unhappy about and why they don’t feel like they are being represented, I think that’s the only way that you’ll really answer why Trump is so appealing. I mean, obviously that’s not all Trump voters, I’m sure Dan would say. —— Jan would say. Ricky? Yes, thanks. Just going off what Tom’s just said, I think ifJoe Biden does win, that’s more than just his first term, if he goes for a second term, of rebuilding, really looking at what a society does — we have to look after each other. The divide and conquer or the division, we’ve had too much of that. How can we work for each other? I put a face mask on to protect someone else, notjust for myself. The other point Ijust wanted to raise was that there was an interesting piece on Newsnight last night about polling. And how, actually, many people lie to pollsters about who they actually are going to vote for and I wonder whether there’s something similar here. Are people open with their political views, and if not, why not? Abbie? Thanks, Fiona. I mean, my sense is that it’s not necessarily that his message resonates with people, that Trump’s message resonates, it’s more coming back to the point that I think Simon made before around the authenticity and the transparency that Trump conveys to some people. I think people are fed up ofjust hearing the party line and hearing politicians come out with very rehearsed and very scripted communications and what they’re looking for is that transparency and that openness, that perception of openness, at least. Where Trump is on Twitter all of the time, he gives them that, he gives them that sense of transparency and that’s really what engenders their trust. To me, I think that’s actually more compelling to people than his actual message. This is a fairly unique thing that may be about to happen in America. There have only been three occasions in presidential election history where the sitting president has not won a second term of office. So, this would be a big move by the American people. I think there is a danger in this debate that we give far too much credence to the idea that this would be, in some senses, a victory for Donald Trump. It would be an almost unique moment in American history. Well, we’ve heard two people now talk about how compelling openness and transparency and authenticity is from our politicians, which is obviously cue... We haven’t yet heard, we haven’t yet heard from you, Oliver. So, I want to hearfrom you. We don’t want any party lines tonight, absolutely. So... A Trump win would be better for the Government, wouldn’t it? No, not at all. We, in the UK, have worked with Presidents from both persuasions. I’ve seen it myself when I first started... I know, but at least you’ve met... At least the government, at least Boris Johnson has met Donald Trump, hasn’t even spoken toJoe Biden. Worked very effectively with Barack Obama for many years. Theresa May and, indeed, BorisJohnson have worked very well with President Trump. And I’d certainly given up as a politician trying to predict elections in this country, let alone in the United States. But I think one thing is areal cause for celebration, is the fact that the greatest nation in the world, in terms of its military power, its economic power, is deciding its fate, not like the most... Most of the rest of the world, it’s not being decided by a political elite. It’s not being decided by the army, it’s being decided by the people of America and I think that’s a fantastic thing. What do you think about the fact that Donald Trump is trying... Depending on your point of view, some would say interfere, some would say correct, the results coming in from the election? He’s talked about fraud, he’s talked about corruption and he’s got legal suites going in a number of states. We are well used to this happening in the United States and it’s happened... No, we are... What we’re not used to... Hang on, what we are not used to is a sitting president accusing, saying that the electoral system is fraudulent and corrupt. I can’t think of a time... If you go back to the 2000 election, similarly it ended up in the courts. It wasn’t about fraud or corruption. But what is enduring about the United States, and indeed this country, is that our nations are built on these democratic values and, in fact, this weekend, as we look to the Armistice, those are the values we share. Those are the values we fought and died for, and I’m absolutely sure that the US Constitution can withstand either the continuation or the change of president, depending on what the American people decide. Jan, since you’re being good enough tojoin us for this part of the debate this evening, I just wonder what your response is or what your view is of President Trump’s comments about fraud and corruption in the electoral system? Well, there’s a couple of points that I would like to make. Trump... The people that didn’t vote for Trump in the last election and voted for him in this election was because he delivered on every promise he made. I have friends who can’t stand to listen to him and they don’t, but they support, they vote for him and... He hasn’t quite delivered on every promise. I mean, the Mexicans haven’t paid for the wall, have they, as far as I’m aware? Um...oh! SHE LAUGHS Well, you know... Every one apart from that one, then? Yeah, yeah. But really critical and for 30 years, actually, I would even say A0 years, we have had a very divisive nation and I don’t believe that Biden’s going to be able to pull it together but where Trump made a mistake is that with Covid, people were exhausted. People were hurting and so he didn’t show enough empathy to reach out for those people tojoin him. I agree that sometimes I just want to say, "could you keep your mouth shut?" but he knows what he’s doing. Az, you have your hand up? Thank you. It’s a typical Trump thing. He’s completely divisive. This is what he always does. In the first debate, you saw him just interrupting Biden constantly and this is him yet again doing thse things. And to say that people are voting for him more now than before, it’s just because those Republicans who didn’t vote last time are now scared about Biden. That’s the only reason that the votes have gone up, nothing to do with what he’s done. It’s not his policies. So it’s a fallacy, sorry. It is! Jan, sorry. It is his policies. You know, to make that kind of blanket assumption... We ended up having, in the different rallies, we registered Democrats who were going to vote for him, so it’s notjust the Republicans. And the fear on the Democrats’ side was because Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio—Cortez were so vocal and have an incredible following, there was a fear that we were going to go really far left. But what came out was that they really do believe that Biden is more moderate and the blue wave didn’t happen, and they ended up losing in the House and in the Senate, but it really made a statement that the voters want us to come together more because we have got to get back to being moderate. Rose? I think what maybe people don’t quite get is that America’s not a democracy — it’s an oligarchy. It’s run by corporations and as many Democrats and as many Republicans have been presidents, really, in the last 30 to A0 years, it’s gone, like, on high in that direction. You know, yes, do the Democrats hear what people want? Yes. Do they do it? No. Because it’s been proven and studied that only if it’s something that the corporations want as well, then it’ll happen, but if it’s people that want it, "Ah, there’s other people to blame." What I continually hear is Trump bashing. It’s very easy to bash him. I’m not saying I don’t, but I’m saying in this moment, you know, you’re talking about credibly accused of sexual assault. That’s been really kept out of the headlines withJoe Biden. And there’s people that are just... Which he’s denied, of course, I have to say. Of course, alleged. It’s corruption on both sides. It’s notjust one, it’s that xcept one has better optics. And that would be the Democrats. Rebecca? Hi, there. I’d like to come back to something I think Lisa mentioned, that this isn’t a victory for Trump but at the same time it’s clearly not a victory for Biden, outright, at the moment, either. And I think that’s something that’s really important from this election, I think it enables us to look a little bit into the future. Many of the same cultural issues that are affecting the US, we see in our own electorate. And what’s clearly the case is that these approaches, just being kind of anti—Trump and just being less extreme isn’t cutting through. So I think there’s something that needs to be thought through from our opposition parties, about how they can actually deal with some of these issues and bring people back together. Caroline? I was going to go back to Jan’s point about the coronavirus and ask, do you think Trump’s attitude towards the virus has potentially put Americans off voting for him, if the vote does go more towards Biden? Well, Ithink, Jan, that’s what you’re saying, isn’t it? That that’s something that has perhaps cost Trump? It did, it did cost Trump. There were many of his supporters who voted for him that... Because in press conferences, he was up front, saying I need to be a cheerleader, I don’t want the people to get in panic. But he didn’t come out with any sensitivity, and I’ll tell you the other thing that really has bothered me, is that in his rallies of the last few days before we voted, was he was using himself as, "Look how quickly I got over Covid because we have remdesivir." And that doesn’t make people feel that he is focusing on getting things done, because he keeps talking about the vaccine. But he’s not saying anything about the people that have lost people, and the fact that one month Fauci was telling us no masks, then the next month, masks are good. And he’s the president, so he’s getting the blame. But if I could also add — I don’t know if you have this perspective, that it’s notjust Trump that has his lawyers going, because Biden had his lawyers going to try to get voter ID off, no signature needed... No, no, we’ve seen that there are legal cases that have been brought on both sides. There is only one person who has accused the electoral system of fraud and corruption, which is Donald Trump, which is the reason I mentioned it. Listen, I think we could talk about the election for some time. We don’t have the result — I thought we might get it tonight, it doesn’t look like we’re going to. Maybe when we wake up tomorrow, we’ll have the result. So I’m going to move onto another topic, but for now, Jan, I just want to thank you forjoining us in giving us your perspective on this. It’s obviously very interesting hearing what you had to say. Thank you very much indeed. And, before we carry on, I just want to mention that we are looking for people to join our virtual audience for programmes to come. So next week we will be, virtually, in Dover and the week after that, Windsor. So if you live there or thereabouts, do get in touch on the Question Time website. You can fill out the form there and come and be part of our audience, from the luxury of your sitting room. You can sit there with a cup of tea. It would be very good to have you, so do please get in touch. Right, let’s take our next question now from A2, A2 Nandoo. Thank you, Fiona. Is the new lockdown going to extend beyond the 2nd of December, as this is a pseudo—lockdown compared to March? And what do you mean by a pseudo—lockdown? It’s... This is not a lockdown. In March... It’s hard to say. I think everybody’s tired of lockdowns anyway, but this is a strange one where we’ve got children still going to school and university, which is great, their education. But then we’ve got... It’s a mixed bag, because you’ve got kids who go to school, play football with their friends, then when they go home, they can’t go and meet their friends because they’re not in the school. So they’re already mixing... Everything we’re doing at the moment, it’s not going to change anything. It’s pretty much the same. People today, listening to the traffic reports, when the first lockdown happened, the traffic was zero. Everything locked down, no shops open, no movement. Now, today, everything’s exactly the same as it was yesterday. And so what you’re asking is, is the new lockdown, such as it is, you clearly feel — you’re calling it a pseudo—lockdown, is it going to extend beyond the 2nd of December? Well, is it, Oliver? Absolutely. No, the regulations will expire on the 2nd of December and it would have to be for Parliament to come back and vote for further measures and we’ve indicated that we want to go back to the tiered system. And I completely agree with what Az... Yes, but, in a sense, that’s important, but it’s kind of a technicality. Are you expecting, as the Government, that the lockdown, such as we have it, will end on the 2nd or are you actually thinking, "Hmm, we’ll probably have to go back and ask to extend it"? No, we’re expecting the lockdown will end on the 2nd, when the Cabinet discussed it, and I have to say it was a very sombre discussion that we had on Saturday, the clear advice we had was twofold. First of all, that if we didn’t take these measures, the NHS risked being overwhelmed. And what that means, for people watching and listening at home, is that we’d be in a situation where people could turn up at NHS hospitals and be turned away for treatment even though they needed it and we couldn’t allow that to happen. Well, people are... I completely agree with what Az said, about how fed up we are with lockdown. As far as non—elective surgery goes, people are not getting that treatment now. Well, in respect of non—elective surgery, they’ve actually taken a lot of measures in relation to getting elective surgery back up and running. But there are some hospitals where it’s not happening already. Well, and we cannot have that happening on a national basis, which is why we had to take these measures. And the second piece of advice we had was that our understanding is this will be sufficient to suppress the R and to ensure that we can then emerge from the lockdown at the beginning of December. That is why these regulations, they don’t roll over, they expire. The Government would have to come back to Parliament in order to get afresh consent and we believe that these measures are sufficient. Hannah? Sufficient for what, though, I think is the question? Because I think what A2 is saying is really important, about how this lockdown just feels very different. You walk out in the street, there’s people everywhere and, essentially, that is going to be reflected in the reproduction number. Last time, we had a reproduction number ofabout 0.6, which meant the virus was radically declining. This time, maybe we’re going to be at 0.8, 0.95. That doesn’t sound like that much of a difference but it makes a dramatic difference to how quickly things turn. I think that as also picked up on in that point, the fact a lot of the messaging here feels a bit contradictory. You can play with your friends in school, but you can’t play with them after school. And in the tier system, you can drink but only if you’ve got a pie or a chip butty with you. I think you might have to have a salad as well. 0h, do you? 0K. Maybe that was a couple of weeks ago, it’s easy to lose track! It would definitely be a pie, from a Wigan perspective! And I think that is one of the big problems that we are in at the moment, which is that actually I think people are struggling to adhere to the basic measures and, actually, the adherence is the thing that is so important. You know, we’ve had... There’s been a lack of consistency too. I think when we were in spring, there really should have been a message that a winter lockdown was a really strong possibility and I think with Eat Out to Help Out and get back to work, we sort of screeched into everything being open and now we’re sort of screeching back into everything being shut again. I think that’s really hard to stay up with. I think the final thing to say is that I think the real focus so far has been very authoritative. All the measures have been very authoritative, right? It’s like, 0K, Rule of Six, 10pm closing, fines, we’ll give your name and number to the police, that kind of thing. And, actually, lots of the evidence shows that that doesn’t really make that much of a difference... Only about 20% of people, apparently self—isolated. That’s exactly right, exactly that. Only 20% of people who are asked to are fully self—isolating and, actually, if you could find out what it is that is stopping people from self—isolating and support them through it, you know, Ijust think it would make so much more of a difference. The effectiveness of that would be so much greater. Whereas I think when measures are presented as though they’re punitive, I think itjust breeds resentment and stops people wanting to conform to them, exactly as A2 is saying. Martin? I agree with the points that Az made but I would say I do think we have to take a bit of collective responsibility here. I think we’ve arrived at this lockdown because people have been breaking rules and not adhering to the previous tiering systems that were set. In fact, unfortunately, the politicians have a lot to answer for here and there doesn’t seem to have been enough full punishment for when rules have been broken. So, I would encourage everybody to step up now. The quicker we properly follow these new restrictions, the quicker we’ll be able to come out of them. Ricky? To reiterate what Keir Starmer said earlier... How did we get to this? People are fatigued, people are frustrated. They don’t have any trust, they don’t have any faith. And people who I would consider really straight down the book, you know, people who are proud about how they take their collective responsibility, they are fed up, bored, frustrated. They’ve had enough. We need absolute transparency, we need clarity and we need leadership, a road map for how on earth we’re going to get out of this, how are we going live with this virus? The vaccine is not a silver bullet. This thing is here. We’ve got to find a way of working with it. And, Mr Dowden, we need confidence in you and your government. We absolutely need it. So let’s start being really, really clear about this. There’s no way this is going to end December the 2nd, so let’s start being clear about that. And let’s be honest, open and find a road map. We’ve got to work together. It’s not going to end on December the 2nd. Well, I set out the position that we believe this would be sufficient. I think, and many of these contributors have made a svery important point, Ricky and Az and others — people are fed up with this. Of course they are fed up with this... What about Ricky’s point, that he hasn’t got confidence? Well, it is worth noting that we are not unique in the United Kingdom. In France, in Spain, across Europe, we are seeing the virus come back during the autumn months. Now, initially, because of this fatigue, we wanted to try and ensure that we could have a tiered system. Now, that tiered system worked, and we are getting the numbers under control, but it wasn’t sufficient. We saw in places like the south—west, where the levels had been flat, suddenly starting to shoot up. That’s why we’ve had to take these measures. But the point that Ricky made about other things, of course the vaccine alone won’t be a silver bullet. That’s why we are rolling out mass testing, so for example in Liverpool right now, starting tomorrow, we’ll be testing everyone, both those with symptoms and those not, so that we can start identifying it better. And in addition to that, we are making huge clinical advances in terms of our treatment. If you look at the mortality rate, the number of people that die from Covid is falling as we make advances with drugs and others. So we’re notjust relying on the vaccine. This will buy us some space. On the point of Liverpool, how is it that a country like Slovenia, for example, is able to test 3.5 million people last week, over a weekend... Slovakia, sorry, not Slovenia. And yet and yet — and they’re in no way as well the country as we are — and the Government is very proud of this pilot in Liverpool. But they’re way ahead of us, in Slovakia. First of all, we are doing it in Liverpool, but it’s also worth looking at comparisons elsewhere. We have ramped up... Well, Ijust give a new one. How is it they are able to do something like that and we are not? If you look at a country like France or Germany, most other European countries, with increased our capacity more. We are much bigger country in the United Kingdom. We’ve gone from about 2000 tests inJanuary to an availability of 500,000 now, and we are continuing to ramp it up further. That’s been... We’re not actually doing 500,000, though, are we? We’re doing much less that. Deborah? I’m confused as to why the Government was listening to the scientists when they said that lockdowns really work when the R rate is lower, but aren’t we just two weeks too late for this lockdown? Alex? I’m actually a few months’ pregnant so I got a specific question for Oliver. There’s been a report released today which that shows that in this lockdown, employers are being left to their own discretion to decide whether pregnant women have to come into work or not, whereas in the first lockdown women effectively shielded when they were pregnant, given the amount of strain they’ve already got on their bodies. What is the Government going do to protect pregnant women from discrimination to ensure they can actually protect themselves in this pandemic? I’m going to get round the rest of the panel, so if you could just answer that briefly. I think it’s an important point. First of all, employers have to make sure their workplace is safe, and they are also subject to non—discrimination laws. So, they should not be discriminating against women who are pregnant on the basis of them being pregnant. I’m not... Does not answer your question, Alex? Not really. No, Alex wanted to know what her rights are, whether or not she has the right to not go to work, as she did in the first lockdown, because she’s pregnant. So she has a right to have a safe place to work, and she should be able to go in there and work as a pregnant person. If she can’t go in there and work as a pregnant woman, then she shouldn’t go in. If it’s not a safe environment, she shouldn’t go in and has a right not to go in. OK, let’s go back to the original question. Simon, you haven’t had a chance to answer that yet. Is the new lockdown going to extend beyond the 2nd of December? And he says this is a pseudo—lockdown compared to March. Well, I hope not. If, you know... I think we all hope not. Yes, well, I mean, particularly, I have to say, you know, for the country’s economy’s point of view. I mean, nonessential retail has been locked down, despite the fact that Sage said that locking down nonessential retail would have minimal to low impact, despite that — and we’ll take that, and we’ll lockdown, absolutely, and we’ll do it well. But if we don’t open in December, and people can’t get to the shops in December, and that business is either crammed into the last two weeks before Christmas, which will create all the crowds that we are trying to avoid, or, even worse, we don’t open at all before Christmas, that will be a dagger in the heart to lots and lots of retailers. I’m very fortunate to work for a business that could make it all the way through to Christmas and beyond with our shops closed, but many won’t, so I have to say, for the sake of our economy, I think we have to open. And I also think the Government do have to look at what is high and low risk, and the idea that we’ve had to shut all our shops, even though the Government pulls my own advisers say that they are low risk environments does strike me as being odd, but we’ll live with it. What I would just say to the Government now, and I think this is desperately important, and I think Ricky made this point indirectly, is that we keep hearing about these silver bullets that are coming along — the vaccines, the mass testings, whatever it is. I think we have to plan on the basis that it would be lovely if it does happen, but if it doesn’t we have to get our hospitals ready for a third wave. The Prime Minister said last week, "Look, we can’t double error capacity overnight. —— our capacity overnight. You know, we might run out of oxygen and beds." Well, in three months’ time, if there is a third wave in February, we have to be ready, we have to have the beds, we have to have the oxygen, the trained paramedics. If we were fighting a war then we wouldn’t say, "Look, we’re going to surrender now because we haven’t got the hospital facilities to look after the wounded troops." We just wouldn’t do that, we would make it happen. And we’ve got to now get serious about this. We’ve got to start saying that we hope these things will come along, but if they don’t, then we will make sure that our health service is ready to treat people, has the best medicines, has enough equipment, enough beds, enough staff. That’s what we’ve got to do over the next three months, because we can live with this lockdown, but we can’t live with another one next year. We have to get out of the cycle. Lisa? Whether we come out of lockdown on December the 2nd I think is largely in the gift of the Government and now. The reason that the Sage scientists recommended a lockdown was because it gives us the breathing space to fix test, trace and isolate. 50, might I suggest to Oliver that the first priority ought to be to take away contact tracing from those very expensive private sector firms that are clearly failing to do that? They are reaching just over half of cases in the country, and handing that to local public health directors, with the resources that they need in order to do thatjob. They’re currently reaching almost everybody that they try to trace because they have significant expertise. My own local authority has brought in people from the Missing Persons Unit, in the police, they brought in people who work in sexual health who are extremely skilled at doing this. The second thing is to get a grip on communications. We can’t continue to have a situation where, you know, as we’ve heard, people are extremely confused about the rules. And when you’ve got Cabinet ministers out unable to answer the basic questions about rules that have been published for which people can be fined or arrested, when you got the Prime Minister that goes missing, we should be having daily press conferences again. BorisJohnson must begin those press conferences again and get a grip on the communication... Lisa, he did a press conference at five o’clock this evening. I just watched it... He did, yeah, and where has he been for the last few months? I mean, it really isn’t good enough, and if you look at most of the countries in the world, their leaders are out and helping people to understand notjust what the rules are but why they are being asked to follow them, because if people understand then they tend to follow them. The final thing I would just say is that that exchange about pregnancy and rights at work was enormously frustrating, because the answer that you gave, Oliver, is based on this idealised world in which people can go to their employer, that nobody will be discriminated against, that nobody will be put under pressure to come into the office, and we know that that just simply is not true, so the third thing that I would suggest to you, urgently, is that people need the right, help and support to follow the rules and stay safe. And that means we need support for people to self—isolate, we need people to have proper rights at work, and we also need to make sure that we get decisions right like the furlough quickly. No government could have foreseen this pandemic, and I’m enormously sympathetic to the scale of the challenge that you and your colleagues have faced, but any competent government would have known that trying to end the furlough scheme with a hard cliff edge was going to be absolutely disastrous. We are a real outlier around the world in terms of that. And today the Chancellor announced, finally, that he’s going to do it, but thousands of people had needlessly lost their jobs in the middle of a global pandemic because of the indecision and delay. So we have to get far better at making these decisions more quickly. I think Lisa makes a very important point about people’s jobs and the furlough scheme, and that is why, and it’s important for people watching the show to understand, that if people were made redundant at any point after the 23rd of September, they can go back to their employers, get reemployed and claimed the furlough scheme, and actually in the overall working of the scheme — take, for example, the International Monetary Fund today said we were a world leader. We’ve put more resource into supporting people through work than virtually any other country... France gave its citizens two years, Germany gave its citizens two years... Let’s hear from the audience, just for a minute, because in a sense you are the people affected by it. Ricky? Thanks again, Fiona. I’m really glad to hear Mr Dowden talk about we can go back to our employers and be rehired, and I will be quoting him in my e—mail to my past employers this evening. I’m self—employed, I’m a theatre director. I also teach in drama schools and universities and youth groups and such like. But, like so many people in the arts and in the cultural industries, we do otherjobs to pay the rent in the gaps, and one of mine was in box office, selling the tickets to other people’s shows. And we were very grateful for the furlough during the summer, and of course it ended and we were made redundant. And I’m really, really glad for those people who still have a job that the furlough has been extended, but it really came too late for so many of us, and I am now risking losing my house and the whole thing. It really, really has destroyed so many people, not only in the cultural industries, I’m notjust talking about theatre. People across the country, itjust is so disappointing, and I use that word to try and be polite, but we are here today finding out it has been extended. This should have been extended months ago. This thing is not going away. We need to support each other. We need to all be back for the recovery as well. You know, we all need to be there in a job and ready to go. And, Rose, just get us your perspective from over the other side of the Atlantic. I mean, America has had its own problems with how it’s handled the coronavirus pandemic. How does the UK look to be faring from where you’re sitting? You know, I think what’s really obvious to me from the other side of the pond, as it were, is that politicians giving these hard dates for lockdowns ending, you know, you’re fighting... You’re boxing with a ghost. You know, Covid is a ghost and it’s everywhere right now. And we don’t know where it is. And so when you get these hard dates, December2nd, or things like that, it’s completely logical to me. —— illogical to me. And the furlough thing didn’t work and so many people have needlessly lost their jobs, and it breaks my heart because I know what the UK is good at. You know, the UK, the public has always been great at pulling together. Look at you in World War II, look at you taking the tough hits for the greater good. But when they’re completely confused about what the greater good is, and that’s because people are not laying out the right measures and they are not, you know, serving their people with some kind of measures of safety, and notjust testing. You know, with financial safety. You’re ending up where you are, and I don’t think there can be a hard deadline to end things, but there has to be a very intelligent alternative, and to include businesses in that as well. I know if you make things clear the public will do their damnedest to keep it going. But they have to know what’s up, and doubletalk right now from any government is not cutting it. Rose, I love the fact that your dog isjoining in behind you. That’s just a great slice of real life. We love to see that. And very cute it is, too. David? Pearl! Thank you, Fiona. I’d be really keen to know what the panel think of the lessons learned from coming out of the first lockdown because, you know, we’ve got a real opportunity here to review some of the mistakes that perhaps were made last time with a view to avoiding them this time, so, you know, where we overzealous in getting people back into restaurants and pubs? Did we encourage people back to the workplace too soon? Were the travel corridors that were opened appropriate? And so on. Well, listen, we could go all round you all, but I’m keen to get one more question, so let me just hear briefly from you, Hannah, on that. OK, so... I mean, yes to all of the above, essentially, David. I think. It depends what strategy you want. There are some countries in the world that have opted for a zero—Covid, right? So zero tolerance of Covid cases, and in that case travel corridors are a no—no until you establish a bubble with another country that is in a similar situation. I think the best comparison, you know, for us, really, is the other countries around Europe who sort of kept travel open. You know, similar size, similar economies and so on. And I think the real lessons from Europe have been... This is like a runaway train that is accelerating, right? And the earlier and harder you press the brake, the quicker you bring things to a halt, and that’s really what we learned, I think, from Germany. I think the other big lesson from Germany, actually, was about really tapping into that sort of collective spirit. Angela Merkel, when she made decisions, she made sure she had all of the local leaders with her, and they presented it as a united front. And I think that that really, for me, is the big, big lesson here. We had so much goodwill in this country. You know, an epidemic of altruism we had in the spring. And I think that’s really what we should be trying to tap into now rather than squander. Let’s get one more question in, from Rebecca Falconer. Yesterday, the Bank of England projected that UK GDP is set to shrink by 11% by the end of 2020, one of the worst performances in the entire world. Does the panel think the UK can afford a no—deal Brexit with the EU? Well, Simon is the businessman on the panel. What do you think? I think a no—deal Brexit pales into insignificance when compared to what we’ve just been through. I think the important thing, and I hope we do have a deal, let’s just say that, but if we don’t have a deal it really isn’t the end of the world. Businesses now had three years to prepare for this. There is one thing that is going to be important and will make the difference between weather no—deal Brexit has a huge effect on our economy or very little, and that is whether our ports continue to operate well. If our ports continue to function well, and all the administration is in place to keep them going, then I don’t think we have a great deal to fear from a no—deal Brexit. And, from talking to your colleagues, do you feel businesses are ready? I can only speak for the business that I work for, and we’ve been preparing for years for this. We were ready over a year ago, so I think people have been working incredibly hard. And I should say, you know, the company I work for, we export and import virtually everything we sell, in one way or another. It’s either come from another country or sent to another country. As long as the ports keep working. And tariffs — you’re not worried about tariffs in the event of an ordeal? I would rather not have tariffs, and I think there’s an enormous opportunity here for the Government. At the moment, the Government’s stance is "We willjust raise tariffs on all European goods to the same level that we have on the rest of the world", and the rhetoric from the Government is "We want a free—trading in Britain". If we come out of the European Union, if we don’t have a deal, we’ve got a free trade in Britain. Why not lower those tariffs? Why does Britain... Why are we going to persist with tariffs on goods that come from other countries where we have no domestic production at all? Clothing, over 99% of the clothing we wear comes from outside the UK. Why have tariffs on those goods? Don’t make the consumer pay the price of a no—deal Brexit. What the Government should do is, if in the unlikely and, you know, hopefully it won’t happen, in the event that there is no deal, but lower tariffs on goods that we have no production of. Don’t make the consumer pay. Lisa? I think a no—deal Brexit would be an enormous failure, and I think it would be an utter betrayal of the British people, given that we had a Prime Minister who won an 80 seat majority only last December by promising us this oven—ready Brexit deal. All the way through this debate, the Government has recognised that a deal is perfectly possible, it ought to be possible, and it would be in the interests of the country to get one. So I think it would be areal failure of negotiation if the Government wasn’t able to present us with a deal at the end of the year. Would Labour... And what I would say to Simon is... With Labour lower tariffs on goods that we don’t produce? We would negotiate a deal. I mean, we simply wouldn’t be in the situation. Understood, but in the event there was no deal... And, actually, the Government doesn’t need to put us in the situation either, because with a bit of goodwill on both sides we could see a deal by the end of the year. Come on, answer... What I would say to you, though, is that it’s very, very different running a company like Next — or Heinz in my constituency — a major employer with huge amounts of money and the ability to plan, compared to the small and medium—sized businesses in my constituency, especially those who deal in things like perishable goods, because they will be the ones that start to go under a very, start to go under very, very quickly if we have the chaos at the ports and we have all of the barriers and tariffs that you were talking about. And you’ve got to recognise that for a lot of these businesses there hasn’t been clarity, there hasn’t been certainty. They were told to get ready for Brexit quite some time ago and then it didn’t happen. This has been a long period of uncertainty, and when you add into that the uncertainty around Covid you’re creating a perfect storm for many businesses with the potential for mass unemployment as a consequence. What I would say to Oliver as well is that there will be some parts of the country that are much worse affected than others in the event of a no—deal Brexit, and the Prime Minister made two promises in that election. He made a promise to get us a Brexit deal, and he made a promise to level—up parts of the country, including my own constituency in Wigan, that has seen relative economic decline for A0 years. If the consequence of this is a Conservative Party that has failed to negotiate a deal, and because of that has seen a levelling down of those very parts of the country that just turned blue at the last election, that will be an enormous failure, and I don’t think it will be forgotten. Well, look, I just want to say I’m hopeful that we can still get a future trading relationship with Europe. We will either go to an Australia—style WHO terms, or we’ll get the Canada deal... Which is no deal. Well, it’s. .. Australia, Somalia, Ethiopia, call it what you like, but it’s no deal. The key thing is it cannot be a deal at any price, and what I worry about from what Lisa is saying, if we say, "Oh, we’ve just got to get a deal", then we end up surrendering national interests here. But people voted to leave the European Union. I was a Remainer... We should be able to get a good deal. I accept the British people voted to leave. I mean, we were told this would be the easiest deal in history. There are opportunities from leaving the European Union but we have to be able to realise those through having a Canada—style deal where we can set our own rules. If you take an area that I’m responsible for, for example, the digital economy, there are huge opportunities for trading, huge opportunities with ﬂows of data with the United States, with China, with India. We have to have the freedom to be able to set our own policies, and if we can do that we can seize the brighter opportunity. We can’tjust take a deal at any cost, and Ifear that the Labour policy of simply signalling that we just want a deal would mean that we won’t get the opportunity... You said you would deliver an oven—ready Brexit deal, but you forgot to turn the oven on. And here we are, a year later, and you’ve made precisely zero progress. It’s great rhetoric, Lisa, but actually we left the European Union, we entered the transition period, we had a dealfor that. What we’re talking about now is our future trading relationship... And you haven’t made any progress on those key objectives. the best way to get a future trading relationship in the interests of the UK is to be willing to say, "We won’t have a deal at any cost". I still believe we can get that deal, but we have to hang firm and make it clear that we will get the right deal. I’m so bored and exasperated with all of this! Are you trying to say this debate is boring? LAUGHTER No, I’m sorry. I’m a bit of an outsider on this one, I accept, but itjust seems to me, broadly speaking, everyone seems happy that is going to happen, it’s not going to happen yet. We just have to wait until it’s less politically embarrassing to concede to the EU than it is to admit that you haven’t got a deal. I mean, that’s sort of, like, how it looks from the outside and Ijust... It’s very frustrating. It’s frustrating that everyone is in this period of uncertainty while that happens. And, Rose, of course, we are waiting for the US election results. There is a lot of talk about, if Biden wins, and at the moment he’s looking on track like he may well do that, that the UK may not be exactly top of the diplomacy trade priority list if we haven’t got a deal with the EU. How does it look to you? It looks still like a lot of posturing and still like a lot of empty promises, and still like, you know, just get it done. If this is what you’re going to do then you should’ve had this done. You should have turned on the oven, you should have checked on your food, on your baked goods, and be ready to bring it out of the oven. Because if Simon at Next can do it then surely the Government can figure it out too. All this oven talk is actually making me feel really hungry, actually. I’m hungry! We all getting hungry now. Gabriel? What I was going to ask is, now that we are looking at Brexit in conjunction with lockdown, can the UK afford to not have a deal? Well, that’s a central question, that’s what we are dealing with here, isn’t it? Alex, you had your hand up too. I was just going to comment on the financial services industry, which is actually the industry I work in. If we leave without a deal, there is going to be no access to financial services to European markets, which is a huge blow for a lot of firms that were out of the US into the UK, and that doesn’t seem to be recognised. I know it’s not a popular industry, but it is worth billions and billions and billions to the UK economy. So how does the Government proposed to address that lack of access if there is no deal? David? Thanks, Fiona. I agree with the Secretary of State’s comment that no deal is better than a bad deal, in effect, but what I’m not clear on is what the argument is for not trying to negotiate a short extension to the exit negotiations, given the international crisis we are going through. So why not get an extension, given that we are in the middle of a pandemic? And what about Alex’s point about the financial services? Well, I think, to the point about an extension, it goes to your point, Hannah. People are fed up with Brexit — they voted to get this thing done in 2016. We are now almost in 2021. We just have to deliver. Alex is absolutely right about the value of our financial services, and of course we continue to negotiate with Europe. It’s also worth noting that the London financial service industry and financial services up and down the country are tremendously innovative, and I am confident that they will be able to adapt to those circumstances. We have been a world leader for centuries because of the huge skills we have, whether it’s at the law firms, the accountancy firms. All of them come together, and I’m confident they will be able to adapt. 50, Alex, are you confident you’re going to adapt? You are in this industry. I think it’s very difficult. I mean, there are some financial services firms that will be fine because they don’t rely on Europe for their income, but there are others. Like I say, I am familiar with quite a few firms, for example, that come over from the States, establish themselves in the UK to access Europe, and then when we leave they will leave, and so we are losing billions of pounds to Germany, to Holland, and European bases are being set up in places other than the UK, which is not only money going off their shores, but alsojobs. And I don’t see how in the next month and a half the Government are going to get a comprehensive deal on financial services. You know, we’ve been watching this for years, and it doesn’t seem to have progressed at all, to be honest with you. Well, I think we could discuss this for some time. We could put you on the spot again, Oliver, but our time is up, you might be glad to know. So tonight our questions came from Lewisham. Next week we’ll be joined by our variance audience in Dover, and the week after that in Windsor. So if you want to be part of our virtual audience, do get in touch on the Question Time website, and let’s hear do get in touch on the Question Time website, and let’s hear what you’ve got to say. Adrian Chiles and guests are coming up, as always, on Question Time Extra Time. That’s on 5 Live now, and you can see on the screen how to get in touch and put your points there. But I just want to say, for now, thank you very much to our panel for coming into that. And thank you very much to Jan, who we met earlier on at the top of the programme. And thank you very much to Rose, and I must say, given that you broke your wrist yesterday, and you are doing this programme especially for us, we are very grateful — what a trooper. So thank you very much to you. Thank you to the audience in Lewisham, thank you very much forjoining us. And of course thank you to you at home for watching. From Question Time, goodbye. APPLAUSE