 Chief Secretary to the Treasury and former Brexit Secretary. His opposite number, the shadow chief secretary Bridget Phillipson, his first job was secretary Bridget Phillipson, his firstjob was on the railways more first job was on the railways more than 40 years firstjob was on the railways more than A0 years ago and he is now than 40 years ago and he is now general than A0 years ago and he is new general secretary of the RMT union, Mick Cash. Devi Sridhar, professor of global public health at the University of Edinburgh and a member of the scientific committee advising the Scottish Government on coronavirus joins us from Edinburgh. And entrepreneur and author, chairman and owner of the chain such as pim express chairman and owner of the chain such as pizza express and Patisserie as pim express and Patisserie Valerie as pizza express and Patisserie Valerie and a former chairman of Channel 4, Valerie and a former chairman of Channelh, Luke Valerie and a former chairman of Channelh, Lukejohnson. Good Channel 4, Luke johnson. Good evening. Channelh, Lukejohnson. Good evening. Welcome to you, my ChannelA, LukeJohnson. Good evening. Welcome to you, my guess that in the studio, socially distance and to every thread are from Edinburgh. Tonight we are going to take from Edinburgh. Tonight we are going hhha from Edinburgh. Tonight we are going to take a combination of pre—recorded and live questions and pre-recorded and live questions and I will also pre—recorded and live questions and I will also be bringing your questions and comments in on social media so I will feed those it as well. Of course, if you are watching at home, join the conversation on social media. The first question Time is from Daniel Guest. I am starting a new key worker role within the NHS next week. However, my only means to get there is by utilising public transport. What can we do to ensure that key workers who have no choice but to use public transport will be protected both at work and on their commute? Daniel, first of all, congratulations on starting your new rola. Mick, congratulations on starting your new role. Mick, as head of the RMT, let rola. Mick, as head of the RMT, let me start role. Mick, as head of the RMT, let me start with you. Firstly, I think we should make sure key workers can we should make sure key workers ran travel for we should make sure key workers can travel for free on the networks. Particularty travel for free on the networks. Particularly NHS workers. They are Particularty NHS workers. They are actually Particularly NHS workers. They are actually providing a hugely important task and what we want to make sure as a union and the rail unions have been sitting down and working with the rail industry to make sure it is safe to travel on the network. And do you think it is at the moment because yellow from some of the pictures I have seen in the last few days, no, with the overcrowding and decongestion on platforms and trains. No, we had a plan as an industry, that the government threw into disarray when they decided to release lockdown so we got more people using the we got more peopla using the railways we got more people using the railways than we had planned for which is putting everybody who should, predominantly key workers, at risk of travelling because of the overcrowding particularly at peak overcrowding particularty at peak times. overcrowding particularly at peak times. We want to make sure we have a regular service, they are increasing the amount of trains next week so that should make it safer. If you have more trains running with If you have more trains mnning with fewer people. If you have more trains running with fewer people, you have the ability to have social distancing and keep safe and we want to make sure that peopla feel safe and we want to make sure that people feel safe and can travel to peopla feel safe and ran travel to and from people feel safe and can travel to and from work. The rail network, the bus network, has been operating throughout this crisis and I think we should praise all of those workers who have been doing that activity. One of the things I have learned from this particular crisis is the amount of people that is the amount of peopla that actually is the amount of people that actually ensure that we, as a society, ran actually ensure that we, as a society, can run and operate, society, ran nm and operate, whether society, can run and operate, whether it’s NHS workers, care whether it’s NHS workers, rare walkers, whether it’s NHS workers, care walkers, transport workers, shop workers, and they all need to have the opportunity to get to work safely. (“an I the opportunity to get to work safely. Can Ijust ask the opportunity to get to work safely. Can I just ask you, the opportunity to get to work safely. Can Ijust ask you, it has safely. (“an Ijust ask you, it has been reported safely. Can Ijust ask you, it has been reported that he will recommend a strike if it is not made safe? No, what we have said, and we have got some real concerns about overcrowding and the fact that you can’t have two metre social distancing on crowded trains. It is not safe. So this talk of a strike is... what not safe. So this talk of a strike is... What we have said is that if is... what we have said is that if the trains is... What we have said is that if the trains are overcrowded and if our members are put at risk, we are saying to them, like any worker who has a legal right, to protect themselves, get to a place of safety and get out of harms way, because some of the things that we have seen, some of the messaging we have seen from the government, is encouraging people, whether they encouraging peopla, whether they think it encouraging people, whether they think it or not, to get on trains, make platforms and trains and buses crowded and they are putting the workers at risk so we are saying, "No, if you are faced with that, step back", but that could mean in certain circumstances trains have to be stopped. Luke? My wife works in the NHS every day at a hospital that has Covid patience and she is wondering why, if she is having to do that, why rail workers, for example, who are, you know, the drivers are in their cabin, so why are they more at risk than the health workers? It is not necessarily that they are more at risk, do you think they should be equally at risk? Well, I don’t know what safe means. When people say what safe means. when peopla say safe, do they what safe means. When people say safe, do they mean absolutely safe in every possible way? Is two metres social distancing scientifically proven to keep us safe? I think all of this obsession about being safe all the time is not realistic in a busy city like London, is it? I have to say, I mean, you need to get your facts right because you are 16 more times likely to get coronavirus than die if you are a London bus worker than an NHS worker, and there has been 28 bus workers in London, 42 TfL workers have died in London, there’s been ten rail workers, and a British transport worker dying of coronavirus that we know of. We know there is a lot of underreporting in terms of the impact of the coronavirus. So how are people going coronavirus. So how are peopla going to get to work? coronavirus. So how are people going to get to work? What we have planted to get to work? what we have planted it and to get to work? What we have planted it and look to do is make it as safe as possiblo and it and look to do is make it as safe as possible and we did have a plan as possibla and we did have a plan to do as possible and we did have a plan to do that. We had a situation where we have 50% of trains operating at we have 5096 of trains operating at this we have 50% of trains operating at this moment in time the next week that was going up to 70% and a that was going up to 7096 and a gradual that was going up to 70% and a gradual increase that meant you could accommodate more and more travelling to and from work which has been put under threat by the way the government have released a message about people getting on trains. Let’s asked the government, Mick (“ash says trains. Let’s asked the government, Mick Cash says they had a plan but Mick (“ash says they had a plan but the Mick Cash says they had a plan but the government Mick Cash says they had a plan but the governmentjumped in weekly. the government jumped in weekly. Firstly, the governmentjumped in weekly. Firstly, congratulations to Daniel on his new Firstly, congratulations to Daniel on his newjob and picking up on on his new job and picking up on Mick’s point, on his newjob and picking up on Mick’s point, you talked about capacity being low at the moment so the first thing we need to do for people like Daniel is to get the services up and running, to expand capacity back to normal so we have more trains running, more buses running, so there is more capacity. Then we need to encourage those who don’t need to use public transport to walk or cycle where they can. A to walk or cycle where they ran. A very large to walk or cycle where they can. A very large number of people, 42% of very large number of people, 4296 of people, their very large number of people, 42% of people, their commute is less than three miles. If we can increase, three miles. If we ran increase, particularty in three miles. If we can increase, particularly in areas like London, particularty in areas like London, the particularly in areas like London, the number of people walking and the number of peopla walking and cycling- the number of people walking and cycling, again, that takes pressure off capacity to help people like Daniel as key workers. 50 can you Daniel as key workers. So ran you see yourself Daniel as key workers. So can you see yourself doing that, walking or carding see yourself doing that, walking or cycling to work? Yes, I’ve been in the House of Commons quite often, I would walk to work. What we have would walk to work. what we have done, coming would walk to work. What we have done, coming back to Daniel’s point in terms of part of it, part of it is encouraging others and we have put investment into cycling to encourage more cycling as part of that but the third thing we need to do is then have guidance for people do is then have guidance for peopla who are using do is then have guidance for people who are using the tube, support for workers in terms of PPE where that is appropriate in order to use the capacity as safely as possible. But in terms of cycling, we have seen a massive increase in the use of carding massive increase in the use of cycling which is why we put additional funding cycling which is why we put additionalfunding into cycling which is why we put additional funding into supported. cycling which is why we put additionalfunding into supported. I will just feed additionalfunding into supported. I willjust feed you some messages we will just feed you some messages we have willjust feed you some messages we have had. "Is it inevitable we will face a second wave given the overcrowding we have seen in public transport?" This one says, "After seeing a large number of people on the tube, should the government make it compulsory to wear face coverings on public transport?" "The scenes on pub“: on public transport?" "The scenes on public transport this week has been horrific with people in tubes and horrific with peopla in tubes and buses horrific with people in tubes and buses crammed in and no social distancing." In other European cities, Berlin, Milan and Paris, cities, Bertin, Milan and Paris, they have cities, Berlin, Milan and Paris, they have introduced things on the Metro, for example, stickers saying where you ran Metro, for example, stickers saying where you can enhance it, where you where you ran enhance it, where you ran and where you can enhance it, where you can and can’t stand and you have to ran and can’t stand and you have to have a can and can’t stand and you have to have a certificate if you want to go to work in rush—hour, for example. to work in rush-hour, for example. If that something to work in rush—hour, for example. If that something the covenant is considering? In the guidance, there’s lots of sensible things we would encourage people to do like would encourage peopla to do like using would encourage people to do like using contactless payment. So using contacﬂass payment. So nothing using contactless payment. 50 nothing like that in terms of social distancing? We can’t legislate for everything or fact of life and every single circumstance but there are singla circumstance but there are things that single circumstance but there are things that can be done. Face things that ran be done. Face coverings, things that can be done. Face coverings, the advice from Stage is for things like public transport, for short periods of time, they are recommending it but there are things in the guidance like contactless in the guidance like contacﬂess payments in the guidance like contactless payments that can be used but the payments that ran be used but the best thing to payments that can be used but the best thing to do is increase the capacity which is why we need to see for example in London, TfL getting more tubes running that they have at more tubes mnning that they have at the more tubes running that they have at the moment. We are in negotiations with them to do so. That is why we have put 2.5 billion additional into the rail to get the capacity going. (“an I the rail to get the capacity going. (“an Ijust the rail to get the capacity going. (“an I just say, the rail to get the capacity going. Can Ijust say, that the rail to get the capacity going. Can I just say, that was the sort of (“an I just say, that was the sort of plan we had Can I just say, that was the sort of plan we had about increasing capacity but also putting the key messaging out, but the government jumped the gun. To turn around and 55V jumped the gun. To turn around and say that we ran jumped the gun. To turn around and say that we can get on a bike sounds say that we ran get on a bike sounds like it is say that we can get on a bike sounds like it is from the Marie Antoinette School of crisis management, let them use bikes. It’s not going to solve the problem. You said yourself that services were at 50% and the that services were at 5096 and the first thing for that services were at 50% and the first thing for people like Daniel first thing for peopla like Daniel who is first thing for people like Daniel who is trying to get work and again, not just about many who is trying to get work and again, notjust about many of our cities, not just about many of our cities, getting the notjust about many of our cities, getting the light rail capacity that is used by many keel workers —— key is used by many keel workers -- key workers and is used by many keel workers —— key workers and the thing is to get as many of the services... Why did you many of the services... why did you jump the gun, many of the services... Why did you jump the gun, then? Why did you turn jump the gun, then? why did you turn around jump the gun, then? Why did you turn around when we sat down and spent two weeks of hard work making sure that we had a plan for over a period of time, to allow proper services, safe services, did the government jumped the gun, after the Prime Minister’s speech on Sunday, we saw an increase in usage on the rail network and we saw people, our members, having to deal with real problams members, having to deal with real problems about passengers. We had one example of a passenger crying berause one example of a passenger crying because she was worried about the issue of social distancing on a train with too many people turning train with too many peopla turning “P train with too many peopla turning up because of train with too many people turning up because of what the Prime Minister said on Sunday. We had not expected that. We did a deal last week which had an incremental change, phasing in improvements on train services, increasing capacity but also allowing safe increased capacity and the government but also allowing safe increased capacity and the governmentjumped capacity and the government jumped the gun. It is capacity and the governmentjumped the gun. It is like the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing. We are talking to the DFT but are they talking to Downing Street? The DFI’ are they talking to Downing Street? The DFT being the Department for The DFI’ being the Department for Transport. The DFT being the Department for Transport. Devi Sridhar, listening to this, what is your view? Yes, I just think it is tragic we are in this situation. This issue about safety, all this could have been dealt with many weeks ago. Other countries have stayed open and safe by actually having public health infrastructure in place to detect infrastmclure in place to detect who infrastructure in place to detect who had the virus so that when you do travel, you know that you are not going to be exposing others, you know who is has got the virus and who doesn’t so you can make sure who doesn’t so you ran make sure they are who doesn’t so you can make sure they are isolated. Listening to this debate, is it safe currently to go on public transport? I don’t think so. Is it safe to open schools but I don’t think so because we don’t have in place the basic building blocks of surveillance to know who has the vims. If of surveillance to know who has the virus. If the lockdown starts vims. If the lockdown starts opening up virus. If the lockdown starts opening up now before we have the infrastructure in place, it is infrastmclure in place, it is basically infrastructure in place, it is basically pointless. You should use the time to build the infrastructure the time to build the infrastmcture that actually, the time to build the infrastructure that actually, when you lift lockdown, you are in a better position than you were when you went in and I think I’m trying to get my head around is in the past eight weeks, you has been in a lockdown which is costly and crude, very which is costly and cmde, very drastic in which is costly and crude, very drastic in terms of the economic and social effects as well as the effects on nonessential services and the NHS, what has fundamentally changed in the past eight weeks to put us in a better position to open up? We are going to see cases go up, I expect, up? We are going to see cases go up, Iexpect, now, up? We are going to see cases go up, I expect, now, the virus will continue spreading and in a few weeks we are going to have this exact same debate again and it weeks we are going to have this exact same debate again and itjust exact same debate again and it just feels quite exact same debate again and itjust feels quite tragic. Bridget, would you travel on the tube at the moment? I think this comes down for the need for government to provide clear guidance to all of us, it’s dear guidance to all of us, it’s not just about clear guidance to all of us, it’s not just about individual clear guidance to all of us, it’s notjust about individual choices not just about individual choices and notjust about individual choices and what we saw on Sunday with the Prime Minister’s statement and what followed was an unfortunate pattern of confusion that I think has left a lot of peopla of confusion that I think has left a lot of people wondering what the lot of peopla wondering what the right thing lot of people wondering what the right thing is to do. It is quite reasonable that all workers should expect a safe working environment and that has to be done carefully and property. and that has to be done carefully and properly. It has to be worked and property. It has to be worked through with and properly. It has to be worked through with those affected, with trade unions, too. And I don’t think giving peopla trade unions, too. And I don’t think giving people such little notice giving peopla such little notice that they giving people such little notice that they could return to work has helped in that way. There is also the big issue that lots of workers face real problems around what that face real problams around what that will face real problems around what that will mean for childcare while schools remained closed in large part other than to the children of key workers and vulnerable children. The government’s response to that is to expect employed to negotiate that on a case—by—case basis. Of course, on a ase-by-rase basis. Of course, the vast on a rase-by-rase basis. Of course, the vast majority on a case—by—case basis. Of course, the vast majority of businesses and employers will want to do the right thing and they are responsible but I don’t think such big decisions that have an effect on all of us can be have an effect on allofus ran be left have an effect on all of us ran be left some have an effect on all of us can be left some unclear. I think we needed a clearer direction from government and this confusion is really costly. Specifically on transport, do you think it is too early to be opening think it is too earty to be opening up, then? think it is too early to be opening up, then? Opening up the economy for more workers to be going on public transport, do you think it is too soon? We recognise there needs to be a phased move to greater economic activity. But it is to sue now? It is unfortunate the Prime Minister and made a statement on Sunday with no guidance to back it up or clearly no guidance to back it up or dearty thought no guidance to back it up or clearly thought through plan about how that could be achieved and we’ve heard from Mick this evening that if the government was to work more closely with trade unions and businesses and try to find a more sensible way of doing things, I think that would leave people feeling safer. Do you think it is too soon at the moment? No, what we want to see is it is done in a careful and gradual way, so yes, where people can avoid so yes, where peopla ran avoid pub“: so yes, where people can avoid public transport, they should do so and Steve is right to say that but it should not rest on individuals simply making that decision. We have personal simply making that decision. We have personaljudgment and discretion, personal judgment and discretion, yes, but the personaljudgment and discretion, yes, but the absence of clear direction from the government is damaging. White Macalou, you just damaging. white Maralou, you just had a big sigh. damaging. White Macalou, you just had a big sigh. Did it? I damaging. White Macalou, you just had a big sigh. Did it? Ithink damaging. White Macalou, you just had a big sigh. Did it? I think one of the unfortunate things that has happened is that the country has got petrified. We are the most nervous large nation of any. 50 the government’s propaganda has frightened us rigid... I mean, it does look like we had the second—highest debts so maybe second-highest debts so maybe there’s second—highest debts so maybe there’s a reason for that. How many peopla who there’s a reason for that. How many people who have no other morbidity peopla who have no other morbidity is under people who have no other morbidity is under the age of 60 have died from this illness? Who have no other from this illness? who have no other morbidity is from this illness? Who have no other morbidity is because I can tell you morbidity is because I ran tell you hammy morbidity is because I can tell you hammy people under 65 have died? hammy peopla under 65 have died? Maralou hammy people under 65 have died? Macalou —— under 60 with no other Maralou -- under 60 with no other morbidity is, Macalou —— under 60 with no other morbidity is, 350, you’re more likely to drown. More people a year likely to drown. More peopla a year drown. I likely to drown. More people a year drown. I think we have to get things a bit in context. What can that a bit in context. what ran that offer to a bit in context. What can that offer to the families of those who have lost loved ones? Every death is tragic but believe me, we are entering, we are already in the largest recession for 300 years. In fact, it is not largest recession for 300 years. In fact, it is notjust one recession, fact, it is not just one recession, the bank fact, it is notjust one recession, the bank of England has said the economy will shrink by 1A%, that is economy will shrink by 1496, that is the economy will shrink by 1A%, that is the equivalent of two economy will shrink by 14%, that is the equivalent of two recessions, it is a depression. I wouldn’t be surprised if we have 2 million more unemployed people within a year. Imagine the agony of 2 million more unemployed people. How many deaths might ﬂow unemployed people. How many deaths might flow from that? How many might ﬂow from that? How many deaths might flow from that? How many deaths are flowing from the fact we deaths are ﬂowing from the fact we have got half deaths are flowing from the fact we have got half as many A&E appointments at the moment is to mark cancer patients are not being seen, people with heart disease are not being seen. And the collateral damage of this campaign of fear and lockdown has to be taken into account. Very soon, I believe, lockdown will be causing more deaths than the virus. Just to be clear, in than the vims. just to be clear, in terms of than the virus. Just to be clear, in terms of deaths amongst those under 65 in total related to coronavirus, 65 in total related to coronavims, it is over 65 in total related to coronavirus, it is over 4000. Under 60, I said. Yes, some of them have comorbidities, it is not necessarily that they were going to die anyway but they have other conditions they live with. Every thread are, you are shaking your head? radical I want to come back to the point about putting the economy versus public health and that is a mistake. These are in the same side. Containment is good for public health and the economy and that’s what we are seeing from the countries that moved early, their countries that moved earty, their locks countries that moved early, their locks down fast, that actually took the drastic measures, contain the virus and are able to open up now. I think having these kind of debates in Febmary think having these kind of debates in February and March is what created such confusion. What is the Government’s strategy? To let the virus mn Government’s strategy? To let the virus run through and stay within virus mn through and stay within NHS virus run through and stay within NHS capacity and basically think that will save the economy? We are learning that is not the right way, the way is to get on top of the virus aggressively, stay in lockdown longer, stay in lockdown longer, do it right and ease it and it is a one-way it right and ease it and it is a one—way street. Right now the one-way street. Right now the problem as one—way street. Right now the problem as it is not like the virus magically disappears as we open, it will still be around so that means it will continue spreading and at some point NHS capacity will be strained, we have already lost 60,000 people, and we are 10% of the 60,000 peopla, and we are 1096 of the “Y 60,000 peopla, and we are 1096 of the way through 60,000 people, and we are 10% of the way through this, if we are fortunate we will find out soon. We have a long way to go and the way to do this is to stay in lockdown, get out property, it do this is to stay in lockdown, get out properly, it is a one—way out property, it is a one-way street, to out properly, it is a one—way street, to stop putting the economy versus public health, they are both on the same side. Let me come back to Daniel. What do you think of what to Daniel. what do you think of what you have heard to Daniel. What do you think of what you have heard going back to your original question about public transport? I think firstly there is nothing wrong with trying to keep as many peopla nothing wrong with trying to keep as many people are safe as possible. many peopla are safe as possible. Secondly, I many people are safe as possible. Secondly, I think we keep hearing a similar rhetoric from people like Stephen and others in government but the fact is some of our public transport is still crowded and that means we need more action and the government needs to work collaboratively with trade unions and other parties to try and solve this. Steve, you want to come back in? The whole point of the government strategy has been to get the R down and through the public efforts that has happened. It has enabled us to have a gradual phasing, which is what we have set out, where we have a gradual phasing where we switch back on the economy, retail in june at where we switch back on the economy, retail inJune at areas like hospitality in retail inJune at areas like hospitality inJuly but it’s conditional, conditional on keeping that infection rate down. Where I do that infection rate down. where I do agree as it is not that infection rate down. Where I do agree as it is not a choice between health and the economy because a second peak of infection would be hugely damaging from an economic point of view. The Governor of the Bank of England made a similar point last night in terms of the effect that would have on public confidence. So we do need to get the infection down. That’s why we have taken the unprecedented measures but we now need to have a phased approach to the economy conditional on keeping the R down. We may come back to the economy shortly. Daniel, thank you for your question. Let me take a question from Samantha Grainger now. Hello. One of the most important things about managing this crisis is the clarity of communication by the government. Following the release of the new key message by the PM on the weekend, does the panel feel that "stay alert, control the virus, save lives" has any real meaning for the public? Does it have any meaning for you, Samantha? What do you think of it? I Samantha? what do you think of it? I think it’s a Samantha? What do you think of it? I think it’s a lot more vague than the original message, I think it is really confusing and I think it’s very hard to get any clear message over to the public with this. And do you think, I’m just wondering, is that inevitable, perhaps, when we are moving out of lockdown, that things will be slightly more woolly, for want of a better phrase? I think the message has changed too quickly. I think changes could have been made without rushing ahead in the way that I feel this is. Has it changed what you are doing come out of interest? I am actually shielding so it makes no difference to me. 0K. Stephen, there has been a lot of talk about the message, there has been a YouGov poll suggesting that SON: been a YouGov poll suggesting that 30% find the new slogan, let’s call 3096 find the new slogan, let’s all it that, 30% find the new slogan, let’s call it that, unclear, 90% found the old it that, unclear, 9096 found the old one much it that, unclear, 90% found the old one much clearer. You can’t be happy with that? There is no question that the slogan stay at home was hugely effective, look would say to effective because polling is showing the British public are more fearful of the virus than other Western societies, even though it is the same virus that we are all confronting. Although our focus EWUP confronting. Although our focus group shows that actually the new message has also resonated with the pub“: message has also resonated with the public and I think we have to treat the public as advanced adults. What the public as advanced adults. what does the public as advanced adults. What does resonated mean? Because people does resonated mean? Because peopla do does resonated mean? Because people do understand. You have 90% in one do understand. You have 9096 in one poll do understand. You have 90% in one poll suggesting it is unclear. We have to treat the public with respect, they do understand that we need to apply common sense, those that need to stay at home to stay at home, those who can’t and need to work do so. They work with their employers, they then put in measures to ensure that those workplaces are Cove so, the way the British public has responded shows they understand what the message requires, we have been successful in getting the infection rate down and we need to continue in the British public understand that. —— Covid—19. Do you understand that. -- Covid-19. Do you support this understand that. —— Covid—19. Do you support this message and if not what would your message have been? It was all was going to build more complex at this stage and the difficult all was going to build more complex at this stage and the difficultjob at this stage and the difficult job the at this stage and the difficultjob the government has communicating in this next stage. It is unfortunate we have had such confusion. With the announcement on Sunday from the Prime Minister with the delay that followed in their being proper guidance with further guidance to follow and this is just the start of what will be a challenging process. what will be a challanging process. The what will be a challenging process. The government are moving towards looking at a phased return for some children to school. Again, getting the communication on that will be absolutely crucial, but it will also absolutely cmcial, but it will also involve absolutely crucial, but it will also involve parents feeling confident in sending their children back to sending their children hack to school. sending their children back to school. We will need to make sure that school staff, all school staff, are confident they have a safe working environment. If we don’t get that right, it will mean that children don’t return, it will mean that lots of people feel extremely anxious and worried about what the future will hold. Of course, the reason for some of this worry is quite legitimate in that our testing rates are still far too low, the government has consistently failed to meet its targets around testing. Testing is of course not a strategy in and of itself, it is a means to achieving an outcome. But if we are going to move through this process, if we are going to trust the British peopla to if we are going to trust the British people to exercise more judgment, then we must have clear messages from government around what that involves and what that looks like and also move to a much stronger position on testing so that we can position on testing so that we ran all feel position on testing so that we can all feel confident that what’s being asked of us by government is being informed not asked of us by government is being informed notjust buy the best medical advice and scientific advice but that we can be safe when we go but that we ran be safe when we go to work but that we can be safe when we go to work and but that we ran be safe when we go to work and go but that we can be safe when we go to work and go around our business. (“an I be to work and go around our business. Can I be clear in terms of Labour’s (“an I be clear in terms of Labour’s position, I position, I was —— are you position, I was -- are you supporting position, I was —— are you supporting the Conservative Government’s position or is Labour Government’s position or is labour more Government’s position or is Labour more supportive of the Labour government’s position in Wales which government’s position in Walas which is to keep government’s position in Wales which is to keep the lockdown in place. We have said we will work constructively with the government, we want it to succeed because it’s vital for the country at a time of national crisis to have that constructive relationship. 50 national crisis to have that constructive relationship. So you think the Welsh are wrong? Certain areas are devolved. Of course it would have been better if all four parts of the United Kingdom had moved in lockstep and it is disappointing the Prime Minister wasn’t able to secure that consent. What wasn’t able to secure that consent. what we wasn’t able to secure that consent. What we will need to see is much what we will need to see is much greater What we will need to see is much greater testing so that we can be confident that all of these measures don’t see an increase... You have made that clear. To be clear of your position, you support the easing at the moment? I know you are unhappy with the messaging and the lack of communication with the unions, but do you think the right decision was taken by the government this week to begin to lift restrictions? There was always going to come a point when restrictions were eased. What I when restrictions were eased. what I think it’s when restrictions were eased. What I think it’s unnecessary is the arbitrary dates. To put arbitrary dates on it and rush it without the proper guidance in place is unnecessary and we have seen the impact that has on public transport and we have put an arbitrary date on the phased return of school reopening for some children. It is better to get it right than to rush it. The government of the people relying upon the evidence to determine whether it is exactly the right point. It is not for us to provide an alternative narrative around that. What we will do is around that. what we will do is back-up the around that. What we will do is back—up the government where they back-up the government where they are getting it back—up the government where they are getting it right and be critical and offer alternatives where we feel they aren’t. On testing and the lack of PPE and the problems we face in social care the fact a lot of school social rare the fact a lot of school staff are social care the fact a lot of school staff are worried about what is coming, the government has to take the public with us. I agree with Steve, it involves treating people as adults but to do that there has to be openness and transparency. Can to be openness and transparency. (“an I clarify a point? to be openness and transparency. Can I clarify a point? We have not put our between dates, we said it would be informed by science, by SAGE unconditional what the infection rate is. Today we have seen the highest level of testing, massive ramping up of testing, 120,000 tests today. You are right testing is important. important. Sorry, Stephen, 126,000 tests. . . important. Sorry, Stephen, 126,000 tests... 127,000 tests. How many peopla were tests... 127,000 tests. How many people were tested? That’s the results of 127,000. I think you will find it 76,000 people actually find it 76,000 peopla actually tested, find it 76,000 people actually tested, 127,000 tests were carried out, 76,000 people. 76,600 people out, 76,000 peopla. 76,600 peopla were actually out, 76,000 people. 76,600 people were actually tested. 50 not 126,000 were actually tested. So not 126,000 people. It’s were actually tested. 50 not 126,000 people. It’s important. It’s were actually tested. So not 126,000 people. It’s important. It’s about peopla. It’s important. It’s about peopla. It’s people. It’s important. It’s about people. It’s not people. It’s important. It’s about people. It’s notjust a test in peopla. It’s not just a test in itself. people. It’s notjust a test in itself. 71,600 people tested. I want itself. 71,600 peopla tested. Iwant to clarify this. itself. 71,600 people tested. I want to clarify this. 30% find the new to clarify this. 3096 find the new slogan and to clarify this. 30% find the new slogan and clear, 90% found the old slogan and clear, 9096 found the old slogan clear. slogan and clear, 90% found the old slogan clear. Luke, listening to slogan dear. Luke, listening to this, this is slogan clear. Luke, listening to this, this is about the message. But you feel that we shouldn’t be in the lockdown at all, do you? What disappointed me most about the Prime Minister’s speech, which I think was vague and wasn’t really paying attention to the message, was the fact he repeated the line that I think is a figure first put about by Niall Ferguson, we have avoided 500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country was ever facing 500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country was everfacing 500,000 500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country was ever facing 500,000 deaths, 500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country was everfacing 500,000 deaths, I was ever facing 500,000 deaths, I think was everfacing 500,000 deaths, I think that was a ludicrous exaggeration, it was scaremongering. exaggeration, it was sraremongering. It was exaggeration, it was scaremongering. It was half a million if nothing was done. A bit like Sweden. Estimating about ten times the number of deaths they have had if his model had been followed. And I don’t have a great deal of confidence in a lot of the advice the government is getting, I’m afraid. And so advice the government is getting, I’m afraid. And sol advice the government is getting, I’m afraid. And so I think that’s my problem with this speech. Let’s ask David because you are giving advice to the Scottish Government. What is to the Scottish Government. what is your take? -- to the Scottish Government. What is yourtake? —— Devi. I to the Scottish Government. What is yourtake? —— Devi. Ithink people your take? -- Devi. Ithink peopla are fearful yourtake? —— Devi. Ithink people are fearful because they don’t know where the virus is and they’re where the virus is and therre looking at where the virus is and they’re looking at the neighbouring countries and seeing other countries seem to be on top of it. A clear way seem to be on top of it. A clear my to figure out how seem to be on top of it. A clear way to figure out how on top of that you are is through testing. If you are testing people and less than 2% are testing peopla and lass than 296 are positive you testing people and less than 2% are positive you are in pretty good shape, this is where South Korea and New Zealand are. If you are testing peopla at New Zealand are. If you are testing people at around 5% you barely have peopla at around 596 you barely have a handla people at around 5% you barely have a handle on it, if it is over 10% a handla on it, if it is over 1096 you have a huge a handle on it, if it is over 10% you have a huge problem and we are finding over 1096 you have a huge problem and we are finding over 10% and it leads to the finding over 1096 and it leads to the question, finding over 10% and it leads to the question, where is this virus? What question, where is this vims? what we actually question, where is this virus? What we actually need is clear information and local information on transmission in different parts of the country. If you know they are part of the country where transmission is very low and there is a low number of cases then is a low number of cases than obviously it is a low number of cases then obviously it is safer for people to obviously it is safer for peopla to go out and obviously it is safer for people to go out and you can share that information and people actually know information and peopla actually know this. This information and people actually know this. This is a strategy many other countries are taking. And just a note on the Sweden, Sweden has one of the highest death rates per million in the world, and far higher than its neighbouring countries. But not higher than Belgium or Holland. Lower. They themselves said they have not protected the elderly and vulnerable. Can I ask you about vulnerable. (“an I ask you about Luke’s point vulnerable. Can I ask you about Luke’s point about the 500,000 predicted deaths if nothing was done in this country, 500,000 over a couple of years. I didn’t say that, he just said couple of years. I didn’t say that, hejust said 500,000. You think he just said 500,000. You think that’s hejust said 500,000. You think that’s nonsense. That was scaremongering. Do you think that sraremongering. Do you think that was scaremongering. Do you think that was nonsense, Devi? We have had 60,000 estimated deaths so far. We are 1096 60,000 estimated deaths so far. We are 10% of the way through this. If are 1096 of the way through this. If we think are 10% of the way through this. If we think we reach some kind of immunity at 80% we basically have to immunity at 8096 we basically have to lose eight immunity at 80% we basically have to lose eight times that amount, so actually the figures are slightly lower than the ones estimated but they are still incredibly high. It’s a lot of people that we would lose a lot of peopla that we would lose if a lot of people that we would lose if we just took a strategy rather than actually trying to suppress the outbreak, wait for a therapeutic, wait for a vaccine and actually be able to... When did they discover a able to... when did they discover a vaccine for able to... When did they discover a vaccine for Aids. We have anti—retrovirals for Aids. But how anti-retrovirals for Aids. But how long did that anti—retrovirals for Aids. But how long did that take? Mick, I’m going to come to you, but I want to play to come to you, but I wantto play in to come to you, but I want to play in one other dip to come to you, but I want to play in one other clip which is on a in one other dip which is on a similar in one other clip which is on a similar subject, Jane Fallon. I will similar subject, jane Fallon. I will come similar subject, Jane Fallon. I will come back to you Samantha. As a grandmother, I’m unable to enter my grandchildren’s homes. However, as their Childminder, I would be able to enter their home and they could come to my home. Please can the rationale for this be explained? Perhaps it’s purely financial as one does not allow their parents to work, that’s me, seeing my grandchildren, spending a little bit of time with them, while the other does. Garden centres have been permitted to open, as they are beneficial to mental health, but surely seeing your family is even better for your mental health and I’m saying this as a grandmother to eight. So, 50, Jane So, Janejust 50, Jane just doesn’t really understand why you made the decision you have. I understand why you made the decision you have. Iwill come understand why you made the decision you have. I will come back to you, but Mick, let’s hear you have. I will come back to you, but Mick, let’s hearfrom you have. I will come back to you, but Mick, let’s hear from you. you have. I will come back to you, but Mick, let’s hearfrom you. I but Mick, let’s hear from you. I watched but Mick, let’s hearfrom you. I watched what was billed something important, the speech on Sunday, so there might have been more people watching EastEnders. It was about 30 million, I think. watching EastEnders. It was about 30 million, Ithink. I may have watching EastEnders. It was about 30 million, I think. I may have that wrong but I think it’s 30 million. I sat down and watched it and turned round to my wife and said, what did he say? That stay alert, I think he say? That stay alart, I think I’ve he say? That stay alert, I think I’ve been alert for quite a period of time. why I’ve been alert for quite a period of time. Why he wants me to stay of time. why he wants me to stay alart, I of time. why he wants me to stay alart, Idon’t of time. Why he wants me to stay alert, I don’t know. Then we find alart, I don’t know. Then we find out in dribs alert, I don’t know. Then we find out in dribs and drabs over the following few days about other easing about what you can and can’t easing about what you ran and can’t do. The easing about what you can and can’t do. The example there, I’ve got three grandkids, my wife and I have had the same debate. We haven’t been able to see them. Skype and FaceTime and things like that but there seems to be an inconsistency, and inconsistency into the point that you ran go to inconsistency into the point that you can go to a park and you can go to a park and keep two you ran go to a park and keep two metres away you can go to a park and keep two metres away from somebody but you ran get on a metres away from somebody but you can get on a jam—packed bus or ran get on a jam-packed bus or train. can get on a jam—packed bus or train. There is a lot of inconsistency in what the government is saying. (“an I inconsistency in what the government is saying. Can Ijust pick up on is saying. (“an Ijust pick up on something is saying. Can Ijust pick up on something Luke said to me early on something Luke said to me earty on but that’s something Luke said to me early on but that’s worrying me about this whola but that’s worrying me about this whole debate about Luke’s rationale. whola debate about Luke’s rationala. I’d like to whole debate about Luke’s rationale. I’d like to know what you mean about campaign of fear. All the issues that we are raising, the concerns we have got more people are dying. I’ve have got more peopla are dying. I’ve had have have got more people are dying. I’ve had have been on the rail with me for 40 odd had have been on the rail with me for A0 odd years and they said when for 40 odd years and they said when this first for A0 odd years and they said when this first started, the government got it right, stay—at—home. First got it right, stay-at-home. First started, I got it right, stay—at—home. First started, I don’t want to go to work, I’m frightened for myself, I’m frightened that I’m going to go home and pass the virus on to my wife and her elderty and pass the virus on to my wife and her elderly parents. People have the her elderty parents. People have the right to be her elderly parents. People have the right to be fearful of what’s going on because it is a deadly virus. I on because it is a deadly vims. I just wonder on because it is a deadly virus. I just wonder coming out of this whether the government has got it right, and hasn’t got it right, but why it hasn’t got it right. And why they haven’t put a clear messaging they haven’t put a dear messaging and a they haven’t put a clear messaging and a clear timetable so that we understand where this is going to end. They bludgeoned into this and end. They hludgeoned into this and they seem to end. They bludgeoned into this and they seem to be bludgeoning out of it. Samantha who asked the original question accepted it will be more complicated now when you spoke about testing, the 126,000 tests, 71,600 actually tested but in terms of messaging and making that clear and transparent, do you feel you are actually winning that battle? It is actually winning that hath? It is very actually winning that battle? It is very difficult for families and we recognise that, I think for all our families, with grandparents not able to see grandchildren and that is one of the heartbreaks of this crisis. And when you hear Mick saying you could meet someone in a park, if we are meeting in a park it has to be two metres distant but you can cram two metres distant but you ran cram onto a two metres distant but you can cram onto a tube or bus with somebody, you are advising face coverings but it is not mandatory. It is about having a balance and what we are trying to do is limit the amount of travel on public transport but we are trying to gradually phase back the economy because as Luke alluded to eartier, the economy because as Luke alluded to earlier, the economic damage this to eartier, the economic damage this has to earlier, the economic damage this has caused as a consequence of that. There’s health consequences of the fall in GDP and the impact of the economy. There’s health consequences in terms of wider treatment other than Covid within the NHS so it is important to have a strong economy to pay for public services and support people’s health and well—being and phase part of that well-being and phase part of that but the well—being and phase part of that but the bigger risks the economy and the UK is a second peak so we are trying to do it in a measured way, in a balanced way. The risk, as Sage advises, of transmission outside is lass than advises, of transmission outside is less than it is inside. That is why lass than it is inside. That is why the less than it is inside. That is why the advice has been shaped in the “Y the advice has been shaped in the way it is. But it is conditional on continuing to keep the infection rate down and that is why it is a very gradual approach. You talk about the economy and we’ve got a question about that from Aaron jones. At the start of Covid—19 crisis, we were informed a mortality rate of 20,000 would be a good outcome. This has been exceeded. It has also been reported by Professor Spiegelhalter that of the unexpected deaths, there is a greater proportion of non—Covid deaths than official Covid deaths. Given this, how do the panel rate the government’s performance and has the pill been worse than the ill? Luke, from what you are saying so far this evening, you think that it has been worse? I think there is a grave risk now that as we enter the Knights week period of lockdown, that that will be the case, yes. that that will be the use, yes. Virtually that that will be the case, yes. Virtually every other European country is now opening up. Schools are open, businesses are trading, even restaurants and bars are opening sometimes and yes, they are practising social distancing but dcarty, practising social distancing but clearly, they have got the same dearty, they have got the same virus clearly, they have got the same virus that we have and yes, some of them have perhaps done testing better than we have and maybe they have treated patients better than we have but overall, they are similar and they are obviously taking a view that they ran and they are obviously taking a view that they can keep the virus under that they ran keep the virus under control that they can keep the virus under control and keep the deaths to a minimum. As Stephen was saying, the collateral damage in so many ways, the unintended consequences of lockdown are so severe that there really is a ticking time bomb in mental health terms and in Sony other ways, the impact on our children’s education, that it is not something that we can possibly be undertaken lightly. There is one other thing I would like to say, which I’m afraid to say is a characteristic of this programme, so there are five of us on the programme, and I would say four out of the five of us are in the public sector. I am the only one in the private sector. Actually, in terms of the shape of the economy, 85% of of the shape of the economy, 5596 of the people of the shape of the economy, 85% of the people working in the economy are in the private sector. And no one here today is going to lose their one here today is going to lose theirjob because of Covid. But believe me, there’s a real risk that millions of people in the private sector are going to see their rareers sector are going to see their careers demolished and I think that really matters. People say, "Economics over lives", but unemployment can kill people and unemployment ran kill people and either get unemployment can kill people and either get needs to be taken into account and also, how are we going to pay the £170 billion per year that the NHS costs if the economy is in the toilet? I will that the NHS costs if the economy is in the toilet? I willjust say because we are a political programme, also going to have two or three out of five politicians. But they are public sector. But we are political programme and that is why, so do you think we should have had a lockdown at all, then? I think Sweden has done all right and time will tell but I thing they have done the right and they didn’t have a lockdown. Well, they say they have had a bit of a lockdown, and their deaths are higher than Norway, for example. Yes, but lower pro rafter than Belgium or Holland. And the effect on the economy in Sweden, the central bank today said they thought the economy could retract by between six and 9.7%. But it is still not 1A six and 9.796. But it is still not 14 which is six and 9.7%. But it is still not 1A which is what the Bank of England 5575 which is what the Bank of England says about ours. I said there economy will suffer half as much of ours and unemployment so far in terms of the increase there has been minimal. Bridget? The level of debt are tragically high and behind each number is a family devastated by grief, we supported the government going into lockdown, it was the right thing to do. We have also supported of the government in many of the measures they have brought forward to provide support to workers and businesses to try to get through this crisis. In some cases, we think there needs to be extra clarity and further changes needed in order for us clarity and further changes needed in orderfor us to... Sorry! in order for us to... Sorry! Classic, a in orderfor us to... Sorry! Classic, 3 phone has gone off! Come Classic, a phone has gone off! Come on, Mick, sort Classic, 3 phone has gone off! Come on, Mick, sort it out! In terms of the question, is the pill worse than the ill? I don’t accept it is a choice between saving lives, public health and the economy. The lockdown was necessary to save lives. We have unfortunately seen we have amongst the highest death rates in Europe. That is deeply regrettable and has caused grief and heartache for so many families. That is why it is so important that what comes next is right, both in terms of testing, also in social care, where we know also in social rare, where we know testing is not also in social care, where we know testing is not where it should be, that far too many social care that far too many social rare workers that far too many social care workers are not getting access to testing. PPE, unfortunately, still remains a problem. But there’s a lot of anxiety around what will come next for the economy which is why we support the government in taking the steps they have to protect support the government in taking the steps they have to protectjobs and steps they have to protect jobs and living steps they have to protectjobs and living standards and businesses but there will now need to be conversation around what happens next. Yes, job retention but also job creation and a plan to get the economy moving once more. Another message has come in from David, "Why message has come in from David, "why wasn’t the message has come in from David, "Why wasn’t the strategy built around the mortality age profile?" This plays into what Luke was saying. "Only fellow staff over 50, especially males pose quit. Then that would be malas pose quit. Then that would be you! males pose quit. Then that would be you! "They Are twice as likely did at that age goes wet. You would not be working at all. "Throw the sink at protecting the elderly, your five at protecting the elderty, your five times at protecting the elderly, your five times more likely to die at 80 than 20’. This times more likely to die at 80 than 20". This is what David is saying so 20’. This is what David is saying so I cannot verify 20". This is what David is saying so I cannot verify that fact exactly. Stephen, do you have any sympathy with what Luke is saying, that there should have been a lot done at all? Know, because I think it was important we protected the NHS. We saw the scenes in countries like Italy where the health system was under massive sustained pressure and one of the successes so far has been in protecting the NHS and entering it has sufficient capacity to meet the number of patients that are coming in. Coming back to one point in Aaron’s question, he says at the start of the crisis, they were informed mortality rate of 20,000 would be a good outcome so that 20,000 was predicated over two years. We are now two months in and our mortality rate is north of 30,000. 50 do our mortality rate is north of 30,000.50 do you think the our mortality rate is north of 30,000. 50 do you think the strategy 30,000. So do you think the strategy has been right? 30,000. 50 do you think the strategy has been right? The strategy has been right in terms of protecting the NHS. To save lives, not been right in terms of protecting the NHS. To save lives, notjust for the NHS. To save lives, not just for the sake of the NHS. To save lives, notjust for the sake of it. And the capacity in the NHS has enabled us to ensure that it has not been overwhelmed in the way that some other countries in Europe has been. But Luke’s point was around the economy and what the OBR was around the economy and what the mm and was around the economy and what the OBR and CBI have said, and the Bank mm and CBI have said, and the Bank of England, that OBR and CBI have said, and the Bank of England, that the measures we have taken have prevented economic starring, that have taken have prevented economic scarring, that they would have been starring, that they would have been much scarring, that they would have been much more severe economic consequences, many more much more severe economic consequences, many morejobs much more severe economic consequences, many more jobs lost, if we had not introduced things like the fellow scheme and protecting 7.5 million people now at a cost of £10 million peopla now at a cost of £10 billion, and million people now at a cost of £10 billion, and just under a million businesses are having their staff protected. The measures we put in place with the unemployment support scheme on its first day, 440,000 applications. We have taken a decisive, quick action, to protect the economy, because yes, it is expensive, the measures we are putting in place, but the alternative of not doing so would have caused much more economic damage. Mick? Is the Pill worlds than the ill? That was the question. I wonder whether we are in a position where, you know, how we got here in the first place, you know, after ten years of austerity, as a country, could we have been better prepared for this pandemic and whether or not we should have been in the situation that we reacted too late, was their complacency? Because some of these questions are material to actually how we have handled the crisis since. My sense is, no, we were complacent at the start of it and actually, as a country, austerity, including the NHS and rare austerity, including the NHS and care homes, the civil service, some rare homes, the civil service, some of the key care homes, the civil service, some of the key fabrics of this country of the key fabric of this country have of the key fabrics of this country have been damaged, and this has damaged the ability to deal with this crisis and it is going to damage our ability to get out of this crisis. 50 some of the seeds of this crisis. So some of the seeds of this and this crisis. 50 some of the seeds of this and the reason why we are in trouble go way back and previous decisions troubla go way back and previous decisions by trouble go way back and previous decisions by previous governments, predominantly Conservative governments, I have to say and that is why we are in the mess today in terms of trying to deal with these issues. We don’t have the fabric, the social fabric, the infrastructure, that we should have infrastmclure, that we should have had if we infrastructure, that we should have had if we hadn’t had ten years of austerity. It is actually the opposite, it is because we took the decisions we did over the last decade to get the deficit down... That is a load of Tosh! That we have been able to have the level of borrowing we have to meet the challenges we face. It is as a consequence of those decisions that we ran consequence of those decisions that we can step up and put in place we ran step up and put in place schemes we can step up and put in place schemes like the fellow scheme that have protected so many workers. So the fact you have protected so many workers. 50 the fact you had to hire so many more extra nurses and try to get people coming out of retirement was not a function of the fact... 7 people coming out of retirement was not a function of the fact...? It is not a function of the fact... ? It is an not a function of the fact...? It is an unprecedented situation. But nevertheless, we were down on than others, weren’t we? But the fact is we have done that without NHS capacity being exceeded and we have met... There was a lot of talk on programmes like this about ventilators that the UK was going to mn out of, ventilators that the UK was going to run out of, run out of capacity. We mn out of, nm out of capacity. We have been run out of, run out of capacity. We have been able to meet that capacity but to Mick’s point, it is because of the decisions taken over the last ten years on the public finances that we are now in a position to put in place the economic measures. But for the last ten years, we have also seen social care consistently overlooked and that is a problem now, where we face a real challenge within our social care sector, not within our social rare sector, not just in within our social care sector, not just in protecting workers, who are doing incredible work looking after some really vulnerable people at this time but also the unacceptably high death rate we are seeing in rare high death rate we are seeing in care homes. That comes down to the rare homes. That comes down to the fact we care homes. That comes down to the fact we have not had a proper plan to resource social care, to train to resource social rare, to train the to resource social care, to train the workforce, and we are still no closer to seeing that. The decisions that have been taken over the last decade have left us ill—prepared for decade have left us ill-prepared for this. We decade have left us ill—prepared for this. We will be constructive in working with the government where they get things right but we have to be honest around the fact that our pub“: be honest around the fact that our public services were not resilient enough and family finances are not resilient enough, either. Let me bring in Debbie —— bring in Debbie bring in Debbie -- bring in Debbie in Scotland, I bring in Debbie —— bring in Debbie in Scotland, I know in terms of the question from Erin, I know you support the lockdown and you think it should continue. But you must also be concerned about the cost of the economy, not also be concerned about the cost of the economy, notjust in terms of the economy, not just in terms of jobs, hugely the economy, notjust in terms of jobs, hugely important though that is but in terms of excess deaths, deaths connected to mental health, deprivation, because the economy is suffering? Definitely, I mean, this is the stress I felt when we went into lockdown. I was thinking about domestic abuse, kids out of school, going hungry. It is very much, keep pub“: going hungry. It is very much, keep public health researchers up at night, this is what we wanted to avoid. I think to understand how we got here, we have to go back in time, 31st of December, China time, Sist of December, China notified the World Health Organization of the novel pathogen and the clock started and countries and the dock started and countries could prepare and the clock started and countries could prepare or not. The easiest thing to do is nothing. Let the vims mns thing to do is nothing. Let the virus runs through, whoever makes it, makes it. The second strategy is used lockdown and release cycles so in March because of what was happening in Italy, it seems like we had a sudden change in strategy from the first to the second, to a lockdown. It came very abruptly and quite suddenly. And now we are trying to transition to what many countries went to from the start is more public health infrastructure, more public health infrastmclure, testing, more public health infrastructure, testing, tracing, isolating. This is what South Korea has done from the start and this is why they never had to shut down start and this is why they never had to shutdown and their death rate start and this is why they never had to shut down and their death rate is actually in the to shutdown and their death rate is actually in the low hundreds. If we are looking at countries to emulate, I would not be looking at Sweden but South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Denmark, Greece and the list goes on. OK, I’m going to bring in one more question if I can from Bertie. Hello. We’ve all seen the footage of overcrowded buses and trains in London this week and whilst Covid—19 is a global problem, its transmission is local. Spain and France have implemented different policies for the different regions and cities of their countries. The UK Government says it is always guided by the science. The question is simple, what scientific evidence could have been used to conclude that Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland should have different policies but London should have the same as every other region and city in England? Bertie, do you think they should be different even within England? Or do you think everywhere should be the same? The R rate is different across the whole of England. You could be the whola of England. You could be losing the whole of England. You could be losing hundreds of Londoners to their death and starving businesses in areas like Cornwall where the R rate is lower. I don’t think we are ready to free anyone up yet but we are definitely not ready to free London up. Bridget, is there an argument for doing it at different rates across England? I understand the point Bertie is making but I’m not sure how practical it would be getting that message across to the public. There is a disproportionate impact in this in some parts of the country and particular communities. In my part of the world, far fewer people have the ability to work from peopla have the ability to work from home so people have the ability to work from home so that places an additional burden on people. We have also seen, of course, big differences in death rates amongst our black and minority ethnic communities which is a cause of real concern and we really have to look carefully as we move to the next phase about whether it is more dangerous in certain environments for some people over and above for some peopla over and above others for some people over and above others and put in steps to keep people are safe as possible. I’m not peopla are safe as possible. I’m not sure it people are safe as possible. I’m not sure it would be possible to suggest sure it would be possibla to suggest what sure it would be possible to suggest what Bertie is suggesting. There are differences in approach in different parts of the UK and some of that is necessary, but some of it I think is unfortunate and I hope the Prime Minister will seek to bring a greater national consensus on this so we ran greater national consensus on this so we can work together to defeat so we ran work together to defeat the vims. so we can work together to defeat the virus. One thing that would feed the vims. One thing that would feed into what the virus. One thing that would feed into what Bertie is saying, should you want to introduce different easing is of the lockdown in different parts of the country is the obviously big test track and trace programme the government is pursuing. Matt Hancock said he would have the test, track and trace system in place by the middle of the month. That’s tomorrow, will it be in place tomorrow? He will make a statement to Parliament on that on statement to Partiament on that on Monday and it statement to Parliament on that on Monday and it will roll out next week. So it will be in place? It will roll out from next week and the pilot has gone extremely well on the Isle of Wight. One of the questions asked about the app was whether peopla asked about the app was whether people would download it. More than peopla would download it. More than half the people would download it. More than half the people with smartphones on half the peopla with smartphones on the half the people with smartphones on the island have done so. One of the other questions with it was whether privacy would be a big constraint, and yet in the feedback only 2% and yet in the feedback only 296 cited and yet in the feedback only 2% cited privacy because the data is kept on the phone until someone contacts requesting a trace. Just to contacts requesting a trace. just to be clear contacts requesting a trace. Just to be clear what you have told us, is it but next week test, track and trace will be rolled out across the UK, or is it the app that will be rolled out? It will be set out in a statement to Parliament, we get criticised if Parliament doesn’t criticised if Partiament doesn’t hear criticised if Parliament doesn’t hear first... criticised if Parliament doesn’t hearfirst... What criticised if Parliament doesn’t hear first... What is criticised if Parliament doesn’t hearfirst... What is it criticised if Parliament doesn’t hear first... What is it that is hear first. . . what is it that is being rolled hear first... What is it that is being rolled out on Monday? He is making a statement to parliamentarians on Monday first partiamentarians on Monday first which parliamentarians on Monday first which is what the speaker has asked us to do. To the point, the R rate is from a huge amount of scientific peer review. The tracing app will enable us in the future to look at enabla us in the future to look at whether enable us in the future to look at whether there are localised impacts. But we started the show saying we need simpler messages. Now what Bertie is saying in the future we will need to be more nuanced, and that’s why we do need to trust the public. We do need to look at how we get as many people to download the get as many peopla to download the 3PP get as many peopla to download the app as get as many people to download the app as possible. What he is asking app as possible. what he is asking his... That app as possible. What he is asking his... That will enable in future to his... That will enabla in future to consider his... That will enable in future to consider what targeted action is taken on a much more localised basis. That is a possibility in the future? Again, it will be subject to the scientific advice but it is a possibility of the app that you can possibility of the app that you ran then be possibility of the app that you can then be much quicker to react to ﬂare-ups then be much quicker to react to flare—ups where they do occur and ﬂare-ups where they do occur and have a flare—ups where they do occur and have a more nuanced message to the pub“: have a more nuanced message to the public as a consequence. Nick? One of the things that has confused our members, we operate train services to Scotland and Wales and all parts to Scotland and Walas and all parts of the great to Scotland and Wales and all parts of the great British Railways. —— of the great British Railways. -- Mick. of the great British Railways. —— Mick. You’ve got to be careful. They ran be a Mick. You’ve got to be careful. They can be a conduit, 3 way of ran be a conduit, a way of transmitting can be a conduit, 3 way of transmitting the virus. You don’t transmitting the vims. You don’t want one transmitting the virus. You don’t want one arrangement in one part of the country versus another arrangement in another part. We had a bit of confusion and the conversation we had when the Scottish Government said you should wear face coverings, face masks, Scottish Government said you should wearface coverings, face masks, and wear face coverings, face masks, and that is wearface coverings, face masks, and that is what they want in Scotland ahead of what the UK Government were saying around England. In Wales was saying around England. In Walas was saying saying around England. In Wales was saying something different. 50 in saying something different. So in all of saying something different. 50 in all of this with her got to remember we are not one nation, when you release the travel and allow people to travel more you have to have consistency across the whole rail network to allow our members to understand what to do, as well as passengers. We have got to be very careful in trying to have different arrangements for different parts of the country. It could spread or otherwise. Are you as a union recommending that all of your members wear recommending that all of your members wearface recommending that all of your members wear face coverings at work? We are in a position where we are saying we believe it would be beneficial for passengers, the users of the services, as part of the protections to wear a face mask. I appreciate you cannot compel them to do so but I’m wondering about your members. Members have different activities and we are seeking to get them to her face activities and we are seeking to get them to herface masks and activities and we are seeking to get them to her face masks and visors to protect themselves. Some of the so—called PPE, as it’s called, face so-ralled PPE, as it’s called, face coverings, for so—called PPE, as it’s called, face coverings, for example, doesn’t protect the individual, it stops transmission, which is not what PPE in itself is meant for, personal protective equipment. In Scotland you are in a different position, Devi, or it has been fractionally in terms of exercise. Coming to Bertie’s terms of exercise. Coming to Bertie’s question in terms of having different easing is of the lockdown in different regions, or even small areas, does that strike you as a good idea? Definitely. This is what I’ve been saying from the beginning, that we need to be working at community level and seeing transmission and making sure that the economy since society is running the economy since society is mnning where the economy since society is running where transmission is low and where it is high we try and get a handle it is high we try and get a handla on it. To it is high we try and get a handle on it. To come back to the phrase following the signs, the thing I want to following the signs, the thing I we nt to clarify following the signs, the thing I want to clarify as there is no English science, Scottish science, German science and Korean science. Science is global, we have the same information here among our scientists as others in other countries because we are working together as a global community. Why together as a global community. why do you think together as a global community. Why do you think you are coming to a different conclusion in Scotland than the government in England? Because they are political decisions. For example, on the issue of schools, we can present in Scotland what we know as the information on schools, we know children can transmit the virus, to children ran transmit the virus, to a certain children can transmit the virus, to a certain extent they are carriers, we are unsure of the degree, most have mild symptoms, a few rare cases have mild symptoms, a few rare rases children have mild symptoms, a few rare cases children suffer severe symptoms a few weeks later, that’s what we know and what we can present. Political and what we ran present. Political leaders and what we can present. Political leaders have to weigh that against the educational benefit, the kids going back against the economic effects, having working parents going back, and looking at the consequences of the infection spreading wider. We can consequences of the infection spreading wider. We canjust consequences of the infection spreading wider. We can just present spreading wider. We ranjust present the spreading wider. We can just present the evidence and they have to make a decision what to do with it. Bertie, I ran see you decision what to do with it. Bertie, I can see you nodding away. I I ran see you nodding away. I totally agree I can see you nodding away. I totally agree with that. On Stephen’s point, we have seen in China the quarantining of different regions, provinces, are you saying the British people aren’t intelligent enough to understand that London is different to other areas of the country? My point was that we can be more nuanced in the that we ran be more nuanced in the messaging, that we can be more nuanced in the messaging, quite the opposite point. In that simple message, are you not leading to the deaths of hundreds of Londoners who live in a world of pub“: Londoners who live in a world of public transport and driving out loads of businesses that are in an area where the R rate is further down? In London the R rate, as I understand it, is pretty low. Obviously we started much higher but at the moment it is pretty low. But it wasn’t when the outbreak began. If we are going back to a system that’s similar to when the outbreak was, that R will go back up. We can was, that R will go back up. We ran dearty see was, that R will go back up. We can clearly see there is more contact in dearty see there is more contact in London clearly see there is more contact in London than in other regions of the country. That’s what caused the higher critical care bed percentage, higher critical rare bed percentage, the higher higher critical care bed percentage, the higher number of deaths. Luke? I think the government has an impossible task and they will never please everyone. The messaging, as Stephen said, is very difficult to get across well. I think that the more complicated you make it by dividing up the country and region is, of even England, then the harder it is going to be to get compliance. Bringing in the example of China locking down regions, China is a communist dictatorship. They can lockdown whoever they want and they bring in the military to do it, so lockdown whoever they want and they bring in the military to do it, sol bring in the military to do it, so I think we bring in the military to do it, sol think we are not a comparable think we are not a comparabla society. think we are not a comparable society. We are a civilised democracy, and therefore I don’t think we can adopt the same sort of think we ran adopt the same sort of methods they think we can adopt the same sort of methods they use in China and it’s not relevant. Yes, I mean, in China, they kind of sealed people in their homes. Yes, is that what we want? As it is we have given up more liberties than ever in the history of this country over this lockdown. We shouldn’t forget that, that we are a free society and the way in which we waved our rights so that we are effectively under house arrest as a nation should not be taken lightly. Given that you are so unhappy with the lockdown as it is, can’t you see any merit in using it more in some places in blessing more in some places in blassing others? more in some places in blessing others? It might have merit, yeah. I think it’s complicated. It is likely what is coming down the track, is it, Stephen? What I’m saying is one it, Stephen? what I’m saying is one of the things it, Stephen? What I’m saying is one of the things the tracing app will enabla of the things the tracing app will enable us to do is to react much enabla us to do is to react much more quickly to enable us to do is to react much more quickly to where there are any potential spikes in infection and have much better data so we can get have much better data so we ran get the testing in have much better data so we can get the testing in quickly and we can the testing in quickly and we ran respond the testing in quickly and we can respond quickly to those measures, and that’s why it is so important we get as many people downloading that get as many peopla downloading that app. It has get as many people downloading that app. It has been successful in the Isle of Wight app. It has been successful in the Isle of Night in app. It has been successful in the Isle of Wight in terms of the number Isle of Night in terms of the number of people will Isle of Wight in terms of the number of people will stop and as it is of peopla will stop and as it is rolled of people will stop and as it is rolled out more widely, we need as many people to download it. Did you many peopla to download it. Did you say half the many people to download it. Did you say half the population in the Isle say half the population in the Isla of Wight? say half the population in the Isle of Wight? Just over half of those of Wight? just over half of those with of Wight? Just over half of those with smartphones. You need about 60% with smartphones. You need about 6096 to be with smartphones. You need about 60% to be successful, has it reached about? The data is useful whatever percentage it is. But the Department of Health, as I say, will do a further statement on it on Monday and will set out where the pilot has got. But the reports that I’ve had is that more than half of the population have downloaded the app. Maybe we will all be downloading the 3PP Maybe we will all be downloading the app at some point. We shall see. Bertie, thank you for your question and all the other question is fed in this evening. Our time is up. Next week we are looking for questions from people living in London. As you from peopla living in London. As you have seen from people living in London. As you have seen from the programme this week, we are inching our way back to having more of your live on the programme, the more the better as far as I’m concerned. After London the following week we will be in Glasgow virtually, of course. So get in touch by Glasgow virtually, of course. 50 get in touch by going to the Question Time website and applying in the usual way. If you want to carry on the discussion you can join Adrian the discussion you ran join Adrian Chihs the discussion you can join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time on 5 live right now. But for the moment, thank you to my panel for coming into the studio and Devi for joining panel for coming into the studio and Devi forjoining us from Edinburgh Devi for joining us from Edinburgh and Devi forjoining us from Edinburgh and everybody who recorded a question or got in touch via social media with the programme. But for now, until next week, from Question Time, bye-bye.