Tonight we are in Weymouth. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, George Eustice, appointed a week ago as Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and an old hand at the department where he has been a minister since 2013. Alison McGovern, a Labour MP since 2010. She served under Gordon Brown and Ed Miliband and chairs the Labour group Progress, originally founded to support Tony Blair. Chairman of The Royal Bank of Scotland, former Deputy governor of the Bank of England and the first chair of the Financial Advisory of the Financial Advisory Authority, Howard Davies. Ash Sarkar, journalist, activist and contributing editor of left—wing online publication Novara Media. And broadcaster, commentator, former Conservative politician and train geek, Michael Portillo. Welcome to our panel, to our audience here, and of course, as always to you at home. You canjoin in the conversation on social media at... Right, we are going to start tonight not with one question, but with two. Can we hear please hear from Suzanna Bell and Lee Andrade. Would you please explain to me, a community nurse, how chronic understaffing in social care will be tackled given the government’s new immigration system. And, Lee? Hoteliers struggle all year to staff permanent positions. Who will be recruited into the seasonal positions that are traditionally filled by the EU citizens? Obviously this is a response from both of you to the immigration proposals that we had this week. Alison. Well, I think the thing about these migration proposals that we’ve had from the Tories demonstrate two things. Firstly, that the Tories define a person’s worth, the value of their work, by money, which I think is interesting, given how hard some people, particularly in social care, but in other aspects like retail and hospitality work. The other thing I find absolutely mystifying about this is that I thought that BorisJohnson and his friends in the Cabinet were free marketeers. I thought they believed in the free market. But actually this immigration system is going to be really bureaucratic. So, I think that actually it’s going to be much more complex for people and I do think that we are going to end up in particular areas like those that have been mentioned with significant challenges and shortages. But the one thing I hope that comes out of it all is that for those people who do work in social care that we work out a way through this to pay those people some more. It is one of the hardestjobs in this country and I am sick to death of people who work in social care being on poverty pay. Do you support the labour position that was voted at party conference that there should be freedom of movement? I think freedom of movement was a good thing. I think that the single market works because it gives everybody a chance and an opportunity to learn around the continent of Europe and to work. 0K, Michael Portillo. Well, I think it’s extremely important that we should not have shortages in the health service, in care homes and in hotels. And I think the government is going to have to show a certain amount of flexibility. There are some dangers I think in the new immigration policy, and that’s why they have said they are going to have to adapt to what actually happens. I do think we have got ourselves into a rather unhealthy position nationally, where we assume that care workers and health workers are going to come from other countries and probably not stay very long and probably not move up through the system and not be promoted to senior positions. And in hotels as well and restaurants, only a very small number of the people who go in as waiters and so on, as chambermaids, have the opportunity to be promoted. I think we ought to get back to a situation where more British people see the care industry, the national health service, catering, hotels, see these as careers and go to them because they want to go to these jobs. Have the proper qualifications, have training and have the opportunity to move up through the system. I think there is something rather decadent about the situation we have got into where we think there are lots ofjobs that only foreigners and probably rather transitory foreigners at that will do. I ratherjoin with Alison in thinking that one of the consequences of this may be that we will have people who are very committed, who have decided it is what they want to do for their lifetime, and certainly, therefore, are going to be better paid. I think the consequences of this immigration policy are pretty broad and pretty positive. You said you could see dangers. What are they, briefly? The danger is the short—term one is that of course if the policy bites and there are vacancies, then the government will have to respond quickly. Lee, where are you? What is your feeling on this? You heard what Michael had to say. I think the care industry and hospitality industry are very different anyway. I absolutely agree that the care industry should be paid a lot more. I wonder about the hospitality industry, though. We are giving a double standard, we are saying they should... Michael is talking about maybe rather than getting people in from the rest of the world why not get British people to do this and train them up? Is that realistic? As far as you are concerned? No, we are constantly looking for staff all the way through the year. The bulk of our staff come from the European Union mostly for the seasonal work because we cannot get staff any other way. Why do you think British people aren’t going for it? Well, firstly, they worry about what they are going to do out of season, so if they are only employed for eight months of the year what will they do for the next four months of the year? That is obviously a concern. You couldn’t employ them all the year—round because you don’t have the business for them all the year round. But I do worry about having a double standard when you say you want to see people come into the hospitality industry and be treated as professionals and look to go forward, but on the other hand you say this is unskilled work, it is cheap labour coming in to do it, which doesn’t paint a picture of professionalism or a job that people might want to go into. George, since these immigration proposals were mooted by the Home Secretary there has been a fair degree of outcry from a number of sectors, not least the hospitality industry and the social care sector. How much of these proposals are going to stay as is? I think the important thing to remember, as we leave the European Union we have got a chance to do things differently and to have an independent immigration policy. And rather than simply having free movement with European countries, we have got the chance to say we are going to have a skills —based immigration system and not decide on allowing people free movement just because they are European, but to actually have people with the right skills from around the world. In terms of the sectors that have been mentioned, it’s important to recognise that the EU citizens that are here now working in those industries can stay. In fact, over 3 million... You know that there is unemployment in the social care sector, there are jobs that can’t be filled in the hospitality sector. Yes, but we need to try to wean ourselves off this constant pipe dream of people coming from other countries. There are industries that could automate more to replace some of those jobs. In social care? Not the care sector, no, admittedly. Do you think you are going to have to realistically give some flexibility when it comes to social care? The point I was making is we have got over 3 million that have already signed up to settle here, so there is a lot of EU citizens that are already here working who will stay and can stay. We have also alongside this opened seasonal agricultural workers scheme for 10,000 people, and there are also special provisions for the NHS. There is an NHS visa scheme and there is a way for people to get points if they have less than the threshold. There are lots of hands up. Let’s hear from the woman here in the front in the pink. Interesting what you are saying here. 68 million people who now live in England, going up, UN estimates. At what stage the panel think people in this country have had enough? That we should close the borders, completely close the borders because it’s got to the stage now there is no education, schooling, infrastructure, it’s enough. We are sinking. Surely someone has got to see common sense and say enough is enough? You’ve got people flooding into this country that cannot speak English. I come from London, in the national health service everything is written in different languages. How much is that costing? How much is it costing for the interpreters. Sorry, madam, how much is it costing for the interpreters? I was in hospital last week, the interpreter never turned up for the peopla who couldn’t speak English. She was paid, they all had to go on and all the radiologists stood around doing nothing. What sort of country is allowing this? is allowing this tourism to come in, arrive on a plane, you get free service, you can have your babies, you can just carry on having it all forfree. Why haven’t they got points set up in the hospitals and you pay it like you do in every other country you go to? You wouldn’t turn up in America and be allowed to go for free. OK, let’s let the panel answered some of those points. OK, let’s let the panel answer some of those points. Strongly made. One thing is I wouldn’t presume to know what kind of nonsense I get up to in America, but that’s another story. On this matter of health tourism what has been found is that migrants to this country bringing more and contribute more in tax to this country bring more and contribute more in tax than they take out of the system. It’s rubbish. No, it’s true. It’s a fact, sorry I don’t care what you think, it’s a fact. Migrants, particularly when they are young, they are working age, they are contributing to the private sector in the form of paying rent, through paying for their cost of living in this country, and also contributing in this country through taxes. When it comes to Britain, we have an ageing population, so you have got more and more people who will age out of the workforce and at the moment with our birth rate we don’t have enough people ageing into the workforce to be able to support the kind of social care and pensions needs which are only going to grow. But one thing that I really want to say because this is really important to me is I don’t want to make the case for migration on GDP and the labourforce, I want to make the human case for it. My grandmother came to this country, she was 17, and it was to fill a gap in the labour market which still exists, which is in social care. Under these rules she wouldn’t have been able to come to this country, she wouldn’t have been able to meet my grandfather, fall in love, have children, have some grandchildren. I know many of you will not agree that all of her grandchildren are a good idea, but, we exist. That is a human story, that has got worth and it has got a value which cannot be measured purely in GDP. I understand that, but why would you prefer European countries over other countries in the world. I think this is the point, you should have a system that is around the people that you need, the skills shortages you have, not about the fact that they are from European countries. Here are two things I think are good about this policy, and you’ll never hear me praising the Conservative government. Getting rid of the £30,000 threshold, which was completely bonkers and an arbitrary cap. However, I don’t believe that by making conditions worse for EU nationals we are actually making them betterfor non—EU nationals. I’d like to get round a little bit more of the audience. Yes, the women in the black and white top. Hello, yes, getting back to your previous comment about why do these people not stay in theirjobs? I think it boils down to the fact that we don’t value enough of our own people and pay them enough and value them much more strongly. Why should we deem a foreigner could do a job because they are paid less? It is absolutely outrageous. We need to address the social care crisis anyway and I think we must start with valuing them more and pay them well. The man in the orange top. Any illusion that BorisJohnson might have been a bit neutered after his election win has kind of gone out the window. It’s nationalism to me. It’s picking someone over, I don’t know, the bit of land they were born on. If they’ve got the skills, they should be given the chance to move on up. It seems a bit worrying, it is not the Brexit dream of 350 million, Utopia. It’s kind of the first realistic, grim step and it will be a bit of a scary wake up call and people might have a few regrets. OK, the woman in the glasses there. How are care homes going to be able to manage to pay care workers higher wages when they are short of money? Lots of care homes are closing anyhow. Surely that’s going to be a huge problem in the future? Can we hear from you on this, you are particularly concerned. You work in the social care sector. Yes, I do, I’m a community nurse, I work in community nursing, caring for these people that require social care. 12% of the health and social care workforce are foreign nationals. We couldn’t function without them and so discouraging them from coming to work in social care is going to cause the social care system to collapse even further than it already has and is a scary thought that people like myself are going to be picking up the mess of these people who are going to become ill and not have the care that they need. I’m going to come to you in a minute. George, I want to put that point to you. I thought you had forgotten I was here. No, I hadn’t forgotten. Provision was made to allow in care workers in the previous immigration bill which was just over a year ago. That has been dropped now. Did it matter then but it hasn’t it doesn’t matter now? I think the point is that the 3 million or so here are staying and they can stay in those roles. As Michael said earlier we have to basically start training our own workforce in these areas and value some of these careers and these jobs more. I think we can do that. We need to start training and having our own home—grown talent in these areas. We have nearly full employment. Are you confident, and you know about business, are you confident we will find these people? Not in the particular areas that were created. We do have almost full employment, but speaking from the perspective of an employer, obviously employers have been in dialogue with the government about what its immigration policy should be, hearing in mind the needs of the economy. And I think what they’ve come up with is in some ways not bad. I agree with Ash about the reduction in salary. But there are two areas, and you hit on them precisely, the double question, where I think they’ve got it wrong. One is social care and the other is hospitality. But I think the solutions are very different in each case. I think in the case of hospitality, what we need is something like what George referred to about migrant workers etc in agriculture, and I think we probably need something equivalent in hospitality because I do know that particularly in relatively well off areas where it is expensive to live, it’s actually very difficult to recruit local workers for hotels and restaurants and stuff. In social care, I think it’s a completely different question. And there, I think, we are awaiting, and have been for some time, a government policy on social care. Of course, there was an attempt at it in the famous Theresa May manifesto that crashed and burned, if you recall. And the Prime Minister said there was a plan ready to go when he stood on the steps of Downing Street. Exactly, and that’s what we need. Because the problem is the social care sector is underfunded and as a result there are all sorts of false incentives, the NHS has an incentive to dump people out of the NHS into social care, but social care has got an incentive to dump people back into the NHS, particularly older people. And this has got to be sorted out, and that, I don’t think, is primarily an immigration question at origin. It’s about how we fund social care. So these are the two gaps in the policy, but they do need different solutions. The man there with the glasses. One of the pitfalls, or potential pitfalls of the points system that has been proposed, I think is, with regards to the minimum wages scale, which has been pitched at about £25,000. It’s going to backfire and cause further problems, at least in the health care system, because the current salary of the health care people is about 16, £17,000. And they do not reach that threshold of £25,000. They miss out on 20 points straightaway which will backfire, I think. The man at the back. People coming over into the country looking forjobs in the social care industry, like the NHS and the welfare state, how can they be ensured theirjob will pay them well enough? Because economic conditions like austerity have resulted in people in the NHS leaving, going on strike, not providing care for people who need it. OK, the woman there with her hand up in the black top. How do you think people feel about being labelled a low skilled worker? APPLAUSE. I think it’s divisive. Care is not low skilled. Care is highly skilled, highly skilled. It’s not paid enough, but is a highly skilled job. I would love the government, as part of this, to bring forward a proper care workforce plan so we can see whether... Of course we want British people to work in the care sector, but we want it to be a really good job where people can progress on and be paid enough to feel the dignity and self—respect for doing what is a really highly skilled job. APPLAUSE. Michael? I mean, maybe in a way to summarise, I don’t think we should be proud as a country of having run an immigration policy that meant that lots of our vital services have depended on cheap labour coming from outside, which has not only meant we are dependent on that, but it’s also driven down the wages of people in this country. And this has been happening for... What is the evidence for that? Well, it’s obvious, if you admit a source of people that are willing to come and do jobs that British people are not willing to do at that level of pay, then all pay is going to be dragged down by it. What the data shows is that where there has been a small amount of undercutting, it is highly localised in particular sectors and particular regions. It’s not across the entire workforce at all. I think we are moving... ALISON: I think Ash and Howard need to give you an economics seminar! I think we are moving to a position where we will feel greater national dignity because we are not doing that, we will be inviting British people to be qualified and stay in jobs and have a vocation and get away from this rather decadent position. I want to take a question from Jane Edsell. whereabouts are you 7 That addresses this exact point, I think. As an economically inactive person, what will entice me to fill the gap left by the exodus of "low—skilled foreigners"? Because you are in the 8.16 million, I think it was. Yeah, 8.4 million. Cited by the Home Secretary as the workforce we could draw upon. Many of those are students. Retired. Currently sick. Carers. You would count. So what would entice you, as Michael says, rather than delegate this work to people from outside our shores? I think it’s tricky for me currently. I’m retired, I retired early, but I’m also on the edges of looking at caring for elderly parents. So there’s the potential I will be stepping into that arena. So could you be enticed and be part of this workforce Michael is calling for? Probably not at the moment, I would say. Being on the edges of, as I say, being wanting to care for elderly parents, or being part of that plan, that to me is more important than going out and working and filling some of those gaps. Maybe others may be enticed to do that, but for me, it’s not something Ifeel able to do. Does it concern you? When Priti Patel talks about this 8.5 million, and then... It has attracted a fair degree of criticism, it’s fair to say, the majority of those people are not actually available to work. So what was she thinking? I think the point she was making was that there are people who can be drawn from that group. Not that all 8 million of that group could or even would. But there will be some students, there will be some older people, for instance who might go into a caring role and that might work for them, working part—time. But the point she was making was, that’s a group that can be drawn on. But to touch on a point a gentleman made earlier about the NHS staff and the threshold, because the threshold actually with NHS staff doesn’t apply in quite the same way. So to get the points there are certain jobs such as nursing where you can actually come in on a salary significa ntly below that. If you are in one of those occupations where you are at a shortage, including the NHS, and of course we also have the NHS visa system as well. Howard, very briefly. We are obviously not going to attract you, the woman in blue, into work, into a position where we are going to force people to work if they don’t want to. But the general answer to your question is, we have to have more flexible working so people can fit it in around caring responsibilities and we have to have more lifetime retraining opportunities so people can retrain. So the Labour manifesto is what you just said. That’s fine. 1983, I think! Let’s move on, because there are a lot of you that want to talk about this next subject. Before I do, I will tell you that we will be in Middlesbrough next week. And after that we will be in Tunbridge Wells with Labour leadership hopeful Lisa Nandy. If you’d like to be in the audience you can call this number or go to the website and follow the instructions there. So do come and join us at either of those locations. It would be great to see you. Let’s take the next question from Hilary Maxwell. Have we forgotten how to be kind? Hilary, you are referring, of course, to the tragic death of Caroline Flack. Absolutely. She in fact said on one of her Instagram posts back in December, I think it was, she wrote, in a world where you can be anything, be kind. Ash? When I first heard the news about Caroline Flack, like lots of people I was completely shocked and saddened. And after I was shocked and saddened Ifelt, in a way quite deeply angry, because I thought that after Amy Winehouse, I thought that after Princess Diana, this tabloid hunger to build up young women in the public eye just to tear them down, that we would have learned something from that. And I know that... Is itjust the press, do you think? No, all of us in some way participate in this particularform of, you know, media ecology. All of us do. We use social media, we drive the clicks. But ultimately I do think that responsibility has to lie with the press. For instance, when it comes to tobacco regulation, you don’tjust expect smokers to change their behaviour. You expect tobacco companies to be properly regulated. They are the ones feeding this quite unhealthy addiction. I think there’s a parallel there with the press. Serving the public interest is not the same thing as, you know, meeting this quite ghoulish thirst for details of people’s lives that perhaps sometimes we should just not have. I think there needs to be a better regulation of the press. I think we might even need Levenson II, so we can stop having a media that instead of holding the powerful to account is simply ruining people’s lives for profit. APPLAUSE. Michael, you have been in public life for quite some time. You’ve had yourfair share of press coverage, some positive and some negative. What’s your view? I think my first reflection is that I remember a friend of mine committing suicide when I was very young, and when that happens, and you are close to the person, you are left with a question for the rest of your life as to, was there anything you could have done, should you have spotted something, should you have intervened 7 And so my sympathy is not only with Caroline Flack, but with all those people who may find themselves in that position at the moment and wondering if there was anything they could have done. I don’t think I do rush to blame someone in this situation, in the way that I’ve just heard from Ash. There is an article I think in today’s Telegraph about a woman who found herself in the same position, that she had been accused of common assault against her partner, and she was talking about her suicidal feelings before it reached trial. And when it did reach the moment before trial, it was suddenly called off. And this woman was reflecting that she might have taken her own life and then she found she didn’t even have to face the trial. And that is a tragic thought here, that Caroline Flack was clearly overwhelmed by this feeling about what the trial would be and what it would mean. And she can’t even have known, what were the prospects that it would even reach court, let alone that it would result in an outcome. I don’t think I do blame the Crown Prosecution Service, because I know they would have been blamed if these steps had not been taken because she was a celebrity. It is standard procedure that they proceed even if the alleged victim doesn’t wish to participate, because that is very often because the victim feels intimidated. It is standard procedure, although I think it is rather a cruel one, and I’m not sure it should be for partners in that situation, not to be allowed to communicate. And Caroline Flack, unlike some of the contestants, of course, was a professional. She has been in the public eye for decades and knows what it is to be... She knew what it was to be in the public eye. And there is a thing that happens with famous people, which is we all love good publicity and we all hate bad publicity. And it is part of what goes with the territory. So I’m not rushing to blame anyone here. There are quite a few hands up. The man in the blue shirt. Hello, I have a unique perspective on this. I have been a television producer for the last A0 years. And also, today is the ninth anniversary of my son’s suicide. He was 2A years old when he took his own life. But I know that the press and the media can be really brutal in its ambition. I know that, I’ve been there. And unfortunately I’ve been part of that, and I hold my hand up to that. But also, it can drag in the vulnerable and spit them out. It can be very, very brutal. And that’s what I would like to say. In terms of my son’s death, there are many complications to do with suicide. There are many different reasons. In my son’s case, he had taken a prescription drug, Proacne, and he’d become very, very depressed, psychotic. He suffered sexual dysfunction. Eventually he committed suicide. I am desperately sorry for your situation, and I applaud you for coming along tonight on this anniversary and talking about it. The one thing I’m hearing about the many things you are seeing is how complicated it is. Alison, I’m thinking, and I’ve been following the story like everyone else. I didn’t know Caroline Flack. The press have come in for an awful lot of criticism, perhaps rightly, but these things can be complex, can’t they? They can. Firstly, I would absolutely agree with you, sir, I think you’re really brave. Hats off to you and I applaud you for being frank in the way you have. I also think of Caroline Flack’s family and what they must be going through, and having to deal with this constant attention must be very, very difficult. But I want to go back to the question, which is, have we forgotten how to be kind. My answer to that is, yes and no. My experience of life is that there is a huge amount of kind people in this country doing their best. And there are lots of ways, as we have heard described, where we are not kind. And there are two answers to that. The first is that we can all be responsible for our own choices and we can all choose to be kind to one another, which is what we frankly ought to do. And the second thing is, we need to make the system more kind. So we so we know we need radical investment in the mental health system in this country. But that goes through every single aspect, whether that’s workplace culture, to make that more kind, or whether that’s the way the NHS can or can’t react to particular conditions. Let’s make that more kind. Let’s make the Department for Work and Pensions, in the way that Universal Credit functions, more kind. I think there’s lots we can do. But if the question is, should we have a manifesto for kindness, I say yes please. The man here in the front. I agree with this thing about being kind and my condolences to the gentleman over there. The fact is Caroline Flack was a very, very sad case and the fact that she has taken her own life is appalling. But we have hundreds and hundreds of veterans who are dying at their own hands every single year. Where is the outcry? Where is the support? The women at the back with the white T—shirt. Kindness comes from all of us. Are we not all guilty of not picking up that phone and talking to someone and just merely sending a text? It means far more if you hear kindness rather thanjust read it. The woman there in the glasses. Me? Yes. Well, I’d be the last person to say the press is exonerated of anything, but on the other hand if you don’t buy those newspapers, and if you don’t read those newspapers, they’re not going to make the stories. I think it’s up to us to pass by those tabloids and not pay attention to the stories that are in the tabloids. We sell those newspapers. And of course much as the press may or may not have a role to play, there is the role of social media as well, which you touched upon, George. Yes, and I do think coming back to the original question from Hilary, that there is something about social media, in particular Twitter, that there is anonymity. For some reason that has developed a culture for people to think it is OK to be rude and to be abusive and aggressive. I think we somehow need to try to break that cycle because this is a very, very tragic, terrible case. I agree with Michael that it’s wrong to point the finger at any one institution or organisation because these are always very complicated cases, but we have issues in our schools across the country at the moment with teenagers suffering from mental health and depression. A lot of that is because they are wearing their hearts on their sleeve, seeking validation from sometimes strangers and not always getting it and getting abuse and everybody is quite exposed. I think there is this point about trying to get some courtesy and kindness back into our discourse. There is something about social media that means it is absent quite often. I think George is right about social media. I lead a relatively sheltered life in this respect. I’m on Twitter and this and that and I’m nota big Instagram person, but I’m often amazed by the virulence and hostility and anger that people will come out with once they hide behind Cornish George, or whatever handle they use. Is that your handle, George? Have you just been outed by Howard? I’m famously not on Twitter. I decided early on it is not for me. It doesn’t appeal to me. Let’s hear what Howard has to say. I mean, it’s out of this very sad set of circumstances which I think show how tension can build up in an individual and suddenly they can go from being in everybody’s eye to being very isolated. Also what worries me, and Michael may be right about not criticising the CPS, but what has happened to innocent until proved guilty? Are you saying they shouldn’t have brought the prosecution? No, I’m not saying that, but I am saying that when this prosecution was brought she was dropped from herjob, she wasn’t allowed to see her other half, etc. That wasn’t the CPS. No, it wasn’t the CPS, but suddenly you are isolated because the assumption is made that you must have done something wrong and I think we’ve lost that innocent until proved guilty dimension which I think is most unfortunate. But if we do get a debate about civility, even if we can’t get as far as kindness, we could get back to civility I think. And if that comes out of this, there will be something positive from what is a very unhappy situation. Let’s see if we can do that at least for the rest of the programme. It has been pretty civil so far. Let’s take a question now from Carol Burgess. Why has BorisJohnson not reacted to the appalling recent floods and had no Cobra meeting? APPLAUSE. George, what is going on? We’ve had Storm Ciara, we’ve had Storm Dennis, record heights in rivers such as the River Wye, and we haven’t heard a peep out of Borisjohnson. Why no Cobra meeting? Well, I have... I know you have been very busy. What about him? When I was appointed last Thursday, the first thing the Prime Minister said to me is, we’ve got Storm Dennis coming up. We want you to lead on that response. We discussed the possible impacts of Storm Dennis. We immediately stood up what we had, which is a flood response centre. That’s an equivalent really to Cobra that is focused on floods. Hang on, you’ve got a Tory, your own MP, saying he was trying for nine days to get emergency funding. You have Tory MPs calling for a Cobra meeting because it gets all the departments together to make a decision together about where the funding is going to go and where the resources are going to go. That’s the point of it. There was one... When the general election was going on, there was a Cobra meeting then. Why has there not been one this week? Because we have the flood response centre and we also have local resilience forums that lead on the ground. Have you had those then as well? Yes... So what is different this time because it is worse this time? The difference this time is we have had two consecutive storms in a row. But we were well prepared for them. During the election, paradoxically, because we were in what’s called the purdah period and ministers weren’t in their departments, there was a slow start to the response, and that’s why the Prime Minister convened Cobra to get it back on track. That’s not happened this time. In fact, we’ve had 1000 Environment Agency staff on the ground. We have laid 5000 metres of temporary flood defences. We’ve had 90 pumps moving. We have protected around 25,000 properties over the course of the last week. And on Tuesday we did stand up a comprehensive package of emergency support with funding for councils, hardship funds for homes that have been flooded, suspension of council tax for people who have been affected, business rates relief, and other things besides. Howard, in terms of the question, the fact we haven’t heard anything from Boris Johnson. Is he unusually silent? We haven’t heard anything. Whether it would be useful to have Boris galumphing around in his wellies, I’m not sure! But Carol is not saying galumphing around in his wellies, you are saying you haven’t heard anything from him? No. I think what George said is probably fair in terms of what the government have been doing. But I think the reality is that this is all too late and after the event. I think what we have to realise now in this country is that these incidence of extreme weather conditions, and particularly floods, incidence of extreme weather conditions, and particularly floods, are what we are going to have to get used to. What we are going to have to have, as part of the Green new Deal, or whatever we want to call it, we are going to have to have a major programme of investment in protecting ourselves against the implications of climate change and rising sea levels. Sea levels are rising three millimetres a year and over time that has an enormous effect. I was talking to a Dutch economist earlier this week and I said, "Well, surely the Dutch must be worried about all of this, given what we have got?" And she pointed out that actually in the 19505 the Dutch had a terrible series of floods and went in for a major investment programme to protect the Netherlands, since when they have not had floods, or they are very tiny and they are very well protected. And I think this is now at the point where we just have to say this needs a major programme of investment to cope with rising sea levels and if we don’t do that, then we are left with George’s emergency measures and sandbags and I don’t think that will be enough. We are doing that as well. In the last five years we have spent £2.5 billion on 600 projects protected over 200,000 homes. We are going to spend another £4 million over the next five years on flood defences. Had we not done the work we have done in the last five years, there would have been another 25,000 homes affected by this most recent event. So, it will be 9% of H52. Good, well done. He is an economist after all. I’m sure his maths is right. But he is right, these extreme weather events are becoming more frequent, sadly. We do need to invest in flood infrastructure. That is notjust hard defences in towns, it can also be using flood plains and soft dams and such upstream to try to slow the water flow and that is something we are looking at very closely. If the government is taking it so seriously, how come BorisJohnson hasn’t responded to the climate emergency that was set by Parliament and the deadline to respond to Parliament within that timeframe? How come Claire O’Neill, who was heading up the COP conference said, you know what, he just doesn’t understand climate change and he told me directly that he doesn’t understand myjob. To me as an outsider that doesn’t fill me with confidence that our Prime Minister is taking seriously the single most important political issue facing our country today. He is taking it seriously and you will see in the weeks and months ahead with a policy that we have got, with the environmental that puts climate change at the heart of it. Climate change is a big feature of our future agriculture policy. Later this year, Glasgow is hosting a COP and we have got lots of proposals. But Claire O’Neill has left her post. She is the one who said that BorisJohnson, lam paraphrasing, she didn’t actually say this, she said he doesn’t give a stuff about climate change. He didn’t say exactly that. I’m paraphrasing. He was the one talking. I think she said that after she was replaced by somebody else. Why, you are laughing at this particular exchange. Yes, basically because the COP situation, the big, global summit that we are supposed to be hosting, is it in Glasgow or is it in London? Who is the president of it? We don’t really know. It’s a bit chaotic and it says a huge amount about our Prime Minister that the collective decision of the government is that he is more holed up in a country house somewhere than he is actually getting out there and offering a bit of support to people who are experiencing flooding. I think the spirit of the question is shouldn’t we be seeing a bit more of him? Don’t people want a bit more reassurance that he has actually got his finger on the pulse. I’ll come to you in a minute, the women in the front in the classes. The reason I am asking is why has the EU stopped dredging the rivers and then they wouldn’t have flooded in the first place. Why the EU did? Yes, why have they stopped dredging all the rivers across the country and then we wouldn’t have this problem. Over here. I don’t know if any of the panel walked through Weymouth today. Yes. Idid. Did you see all the empty shops? Shouldn’t the government cut business rates for starters? That would help the shops. You are talking about business rates for those who have just been flooded. Secondly, what the gentleman there said about HSZ. If you got the Chinese to do HSZ, you’d have loads of loose change to do all the flooding relief. Michael. I sense the mood of the country is that in all sorts of ways we want enormous change, we just don’t want things to be done the way they have been done in the past. With the floods it really is like Groundhog Day. Twice a year this happens, there are more floods, a minister comes on and says how much we have spent. People locally say it has all been ineffective and then we have a row about dredging the rivers and so on. It looks to me as though the Environment Agency has lost all public confidence. I think we really are at a stage when we want something bigger and different. We want something quite exceptional, a strategic look at how we are going to deal with this. It can’t surelyjust be about building defences so we move the water further down river and a different lot of people get flooded. Surely what we need to do is think about how we can get the water from where it is falling to the only plate which is safe, which is the ocean. That is the only place where it doesn’t affect other people. I just don’t get any of that strategic feeling. I think the comparison with HS2 is apposite in this respect. I’m in favour of H52, but I do think we need megaprojects to move the water to places where it is safe, rather than just this defeated repeated effort of building a few flood defences here and there. The question is about BorisJohnson who seems to be very good at coming to the House of Commons and making very enthusiastic speeches about trains, or doing things, or having energy, but when it actually comes to getting projects delivered he seems to be pretty poor. What did he fail to do in London? The garden bridge. Water cannon. He was going to have an airport on an island. We’ve had all of these great plans. Had he done a photocell this week, you too would have been the leading critics. One of the most surprising thing is I have ever heard is that Michael Portillo is in favour of investment in railways. That is pretty astonishing. There is a point here, you have a cabinet for a reason, it is not a one—man show and there are issues like this. The Prime Minister spoke to me last Thursday, two days before the impact of the floods came through we discussed what was coming up and we discussed what the plan would be and we stood up all of our emergency procedures and we had a thousand EA staff working out on the ground hard, knocking on doors, warning people and helping to support communities. There is another point to what Michael said as well, the lack of strategic thinking, you have been in this department since 2013 and have been talking about the floods since just after you started. Do you think why are we still in the situation that we have been in for years? Know, because I can remember when I worked for David Cameron many years ago now in 2007 and there was a flood then and there were 17,000 homes flooded. This time we have had a worse weather event, the land is already waterlogged, two consecutive storms, and is terrible, we have had M00 homes flooded, but were it not for the defences we build over the last decade, that number would have been more like 25,000 homes. What we are doing is working, but there is always more that we can do and that is where we need to continue investing in the future. I’m trying to get as many questions in tonight. Let’s take a question now from Maggie Stansfield. Should we continue to support the BBC as a universal public service broadcaster? AUDIENCE SUCKS AIR THROUGH TEETH. SOME "OOHS". I’m not sure what that means, that sort of sigh, the noise in the room! Howard, I wanted to come to first on this because you were part of the Charter review for the BBC, the review that happens to find out how much money the BBC should be given, if at all. And you are part of the review in 2004—05, and it looked at the licence fee. Yes indeed. The short answer to your question, I would say, yes, personally. We looked at this 15 years ago and concluded, the licence fee is a funny thing in a way because it has several things up against it. One is, of course, it’s a poll tax. So the rich pay the same as the not so rich, and that’s not normally the good way of taxing, really, because you like to have taxes that are progressive. So it’s not good from that point of view. And the only thing it had going for it at the time... Well, two things really. One, people actually wanted it. There was a majority in favour of funding the BBC with a licence fee. So as economists, we would be set there saying, well, why should we sit there and tell people they can’t have what it is clear they actually want, even if it is a slightly odd way of doing it. And what’s changed now is that it’s clear that only about a quarter of the population on recent opinion polls do favour the licence fee. So that has been a change over the 15 years since I last looked at it closely. So I think the question now has to be asked, and the problem is that while the BBC appears on free view, and the problem is that while the BBC appears on Freeview, it is not possible to determine who is watching the BBC at any one time, and determine whether you can have a subscription service or not. Because you are getting it through Freeview. I think in the long run, in ten or 15 years time, probably the BBC will have to move to some kind of a different funding model, a subscription model, when the technology is available to know exactly who is watching what, and then you can charge them appropriately for it. In the meantime, I have to say, I would stick with the licence fee. Alison? I reserve the right to criticise the BBC when it does things that I don’t like and puts on programmes I don’t like... Feel free, don’t mind me! But I think we all have to be a bit careful here, because I think there’s a tonne of things that the BBC does that I can’t see really a subscription service doing. I can’t see anyone else doing. Most primary schools in the country watch Newsround now, which is absolutely brilliant. I can’t see anybody making that for them for free. There’s loads of programming that we all know of that’s absolutely brilliant that the BBC does, so I think we have to be careful. Nobody should give the BBC 3 sort of free pass, and we should engage in our national support... Nationalsport, rather, of complaining about the telly, and even shouting at it. I’m sure people do that at this programme. I know they do. I’m sure they do, but I would say, let’s all be a bit careful, because the BBC is an incredible national institution, like the National Health Service. APPLAUSE. Pretty unique to this country, and I can’t see a paid for subscription service doing some of the things that the BBC does. Michael, as a former Conservative Cabinet minister, Secretary of State, what do you make of these briefings that seem to be coming out of Number 10? In the papers at the weekend? Do you mind if I answer the question, the main question? Well, you can do that one as well after. Yes, if you like. Although that’s not an area of my expertise. But I have to begin by declaring an interest, because I derive most of my income from the licence payer. LAUGHTER. Bite the hand, Michael! And therefore, you might be surprised when I say that I do not believe the licence fee can survive. It’s partly, actually, my experience of making films. I make films with very young people. And the young people with whom I make films do not pay the licence fee. They do not have televisions. They consume their media on their mobile phones or on their laptops. And since, I think it was about two years ago, when you went on your laptop to download, to go to iPlayer and catch up, it asks you whether you have a licence fee. You now have to answer that question, so they answer no and that blocks them out of the BBC. Therefore these young people now have no connection with the BBC. They don’t even watch the programmes they make with me because they have no access to the BBC. And the BBC is losing its audience. And why? Because these people have any other number of opportunities to watch television, and they consume it as they wish and when they wish. The other extraordinary thing is that when you are abroad, you cannot consume the BBC. Or not BBC television, anyway. So even though I pay the licence fee, when I go abroad I am blocked from watching the BBC. And don’t forget the licence fee is notjust for television. It’s all the radio stations and online as well. Yes, radio is a different question and a much simpler question. But I also think that if we talk about television for the moment, there’s not much evidence now on the BBC that it is performing a public service role. I don’t think there is much evidence on the BBC now that they are doing much that other people couldn’t possibly do. For example, in arts, there are almost no arts programming now on BBC television. You won’t see arts, you would watch Sky Arts. Wouldn’t you watch BBC Four? But coming to the more important point, not only can British people not watch the BBC abroad when they have paid their licence fee. Foreigners can’t consume the BBC directly either. And there are eight, 9 billion people out there, who would be very keen to consume the BBC. I don’t want to keep butting in, but there is BBC World. In the interests of accuracy. BBC World is not a real channel. The BBC is not proud of BBC World, seriously. I think the people who work on BBC World are probably proud of BBC World. I’m not sure that they are. LAUGHTER. But the point is, 20 years ago, Netﬂix was a corner shop renting video tapes. Today it is spending $10 billion per year on content. 20 years ago, the BBC... And it is billions in debt. 20 years ago the BBC was a global name. Today the BBC is wedded to the licence fee. It is like a polar bear on a receding piece of ice. APPLAUSE. I have to get the rest of the panel in. Ash? I’ve got really strong feelings about this. I think the BBC needs to adapt or die, but it shouldn’t adapt in the direction that Dominic Cummings and his team at Number 10 are angling for it to change, which is to privatise, commercialise and no longer be licence funded model. I think the way it needs to adapt is to first be established on a permanent statutory footing. So you don’t have this brouhaha every ten years over the Charter renewal, in which the government of the day is able to exert a tremendous amount of political pressure by essentially holding the BBC’s continuing existence hostage. I also think we need to look at things like a digital licence fee, and also taxing some of these big digital multinationals like Netﬂix, like Facebook, Google, which make tremendous amounts of money in this country. I know there are a lot of people on the left who at the moment are furious with the BBC for elements of its news and current affairs coverage during the general election, and I share a lot of those criticisms. But what I would say to those people on the left who are currently saying they may as well support defunding the BBC on political grounds, is that handing over the British broadcasting environment to Rupert Murdoch, which is what would happen if we no longer had a licence payerfunded BBC, is not a credible left—wing position. APPLAUSE. George, what’s going on? There’s going to be a licence fee model until at least 2027, so nothing is being done in a hurry anyway. The BBC is a cherished institution, there is no doubt about that. But I think both Michael and Howard have made good points, which is, just see how media has changed over the last decade with people now getting their content from smartphones, from iPads. Imagine what’s going to happen in the next seven years. So it’s appropriate in my view to think about what the funding model should be and how best you should raise money to fund the BBC, because it can’t make sense in the long term to still have a licence fee based on sort of conventional televisions that we grew up with in the 605 and 705. At some point the model will need to change to reflect the changing way people are receiving their content. And do you think public service broadcasting is possible under a different model? Does that even matter, do you think? I personally think it does, yes. I think there is an important role for public service broadcasting and this is where the difficulty comes. How do you fund that on a subscription only service? These are complex and difficult issues and that’s why nothing is being done in a hurry and indeed, nothing much will change until 2027, which is when the licence fee model continues to at the very least. So what about the sabre rattling coming from your government, then, talking about the licence fee being under threat? Why do that if it’s not in a hurry to change things? Is itjust to exert a bit of influence over the appointment of the next director—general? I personally haven’t seen any sabre rattling. You haven’t seen any sabre rattling?! It’s all over the papers, the front page of the Sunday Times! You should learn not to believe everything you see in the papers. We know your background, the papers. I don’t believe everything I read in the papers. I never have. Howard has referred to looking at things over ten or 15 years. And George hasjust said everything is going to be the same until 2027. I don’t think either one of you has an idea of how quickly this picture is changing and I’m deeply depressed by both those answers. I think the BBC may be in very serious difficulty if we wait until 2027 before we decide on a different model of how the BBC can be carried forward, notjust as a means for us to watch television, but as a means of taking the wonders of the BBC to the world, which at the moment are not available in a modern form, that is to say they are not available to the individual who wants to buy a BBC programme at the moment that he or she chooses to watch it. APPLAUSE. We have very little time left, but you have had your hand up for quite some time. You may end up having the last word. I just think the BBC is a national institution that we are all proud of. And I don’t think anybody should be worrying about paying that licence fee. It’s incredibly good value. What I think is the problem is what are we spending that money on, how much do we pay our presenters... And I’m not asking this to you, Fiona! If we are paying six and seven figure salaries to TV presenters, what does that actually say, coming back to the lady’s first question of tonight, the people that we value in this country, the people that are doing really hard jobs, day in, day out, for a pittance, and why is that money going to pay people to do something here, when I think anybody in the audience could get up and present a programme brilliantly as well. I’m being controversial! Fighting talk. To me and Michael. I’ll do it next week if you like. 0K, watch this space. On that bombshell, I won’t be sitting here again... What’s your name? Michael. Michael will be sitting here next week. Our hour is up. Just as well. Next week we are in Middlesbrough and the following week we are in Tunbridge Wells in Kent. Callus if you’d like to be in the audience. Or if you’d like to sit here, who knows, or present train programmes! Or you can go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions there. If you want to have your say and continue the conversation on tonight’s topics, you can as always join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time extra time on 5 Live right now. But for now, thank you very much to the panel, to Michael, to the audience here and to you at home for watching and listening. From Weymouth. Bye—bye.