Tonight, we are in Tunbridge Wells. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight plasma panel, Matt Hancock, appointed Health Secretary nearty two Hancock, appointed Health Secretary nearly two years ago by Theresa May, nearty two years ago by Theresa May, kept in the job nearly two years ago by Theresa May, kept in thejob by nearly two years ago by Theresa May, kept in the job by Boris nearly two years ago by Theresa May, kept in the job by Borisjohnson. nearly two years ago by Theresa May, kept in thejob by Borisjohnson. He kept in the job by Boris johnson. He now faces kept in thejob by Borisjohnson. He now faces one of the biggest challenges for his department, the Government and the country. Former Foreign Secretary and deputy leader of the Labour Party and an MP since of the labour Party and an MP since 1974, Margaret of the Labour Party and an MP since 1974, Margaret Beckett. Layla Moran, education spokesperson for the Liberal Democrats, rumoured to be a candidate for the leadership of the randidate for the leadership of the party- candidate for the leadership of the party. Tim Stanley, journalist, broadcaster and columnist for the Daily Telegraph stop doctor, writer Daily Telagraph stop doctor, writer and TV Daily Telegraph stop doctor, writer and TV presenter on numerous health programmes including CBBC’s programmes including (3505 operation programmes including CBBC’s operation ouch, Xand van Tulleken. APPLAUSE Welcome to our panel, to the audience here and of course, to you at home. Remember, you can audience here and of course, to you at home. Remember, you canjoin in at home. Remember, you ranjoin in with the at home. Remember, you canjoin in with the usual at home. Remember, you canjoin in with the usualfashion at home. Remember, you canjoin in with the usual fashion on social media. It is pretty obvious, I think, to all of us here and to you at home that there is one big subject dominating the conversation at the moment and having seen all the questions that you had submitted here, there is no doubt the coronavirus and its impact is what peopla here coronavirus and its impact is what people here want to talk about. So peopla here want to talk about. So we’re going to people here want to talk about. So we’re going to do things just a little differently this evening. We have the Health Secretary with us. We are pleased to have you here. We are going take some 0 and a questions, are going take some 0 and 3 questions, quickfire, to hear the concerns of you here. We will do the politic and concerns of you here. We will do the politics and challenges to the Government, you won’t get of quite that easily. But a general question about coronavirus Jill that easily. But a general question about coronavirusjill Pullin. How concerned about coronavirus should we be? Cleariy concerned about coronavirus should we be? Clearly coronavirus is a huge we be? Cleariy coronavirus is a huge challenge to the we be? Clearly coronavirus is a huge challenge to the country. On behalf of everyone, I want to send our deepest condolences to the family and the loved ones of the patient who died today with coronavirus. I’m sure that will be a worrying moment for lots of people and understandably so. And I for lots of people and understandably so. And Ifeel the responsibility deeply for getting the Government response to this right. The Government are the only people who need to respond —— not people who need to respond -- not the only people people who need to respond —— not the only people that need to respond, we can all play a part in respond, we ran all play a part in it. It is a respond, we can all play a part in it. It is a perfectly reasonable for it. It is a perfectly reasonabla for peopla to be it. It is a perfectly reasonable for people to be worried. Of course, for peopla to be worried. Of course, for the majority of people to be worried. Of course, for the majority of people, if they the majority of peopla, if they catch the majority of people, if they catch coronavirus, then it will be a catch coronavims, then it will be a mild, relatively catch coronavirus, then it will be a mild, relatively mild disease and the vast majority will fully recover. And so from that point of view, for most people, this will be view, for most peopla, this will be something akin view, for most people, this will be something akin to getting the flu if something akin to getting the ﬂu if they get it. something akin to getting the flu if they get it. But obviously it is also having some very significant effects, both on the economy, in terms of people... How they manage their daily lives. And for a small proportion of people, we estimate around 1% of those who catch it, around 196 of those who match it, then it is around 1% of those who catch it, then it is fatal. So it is a very serious consideration. The thing that makes it more difficult is that there is a virus, this disease is new. That means that none of us have the natural antibodies that we have to something like the flu. So it’s a to something like the ﬂu. So it’s a serious to something like the flu. So it’s a serious problem for the country and all of us need to play our part and ran play our all of us need to play our part and can play our part in making sure we ran play our part in making sure we as a country, and can play our part in making sure we as a country, and as a world, respond as well as we possibly can. respond as well as we possibly ran. (“an I ask, respond as well as we possibly can. Can I ask, how worried are you? I’m (“an I ask, how worried are you? I’m not personally Can I ask, how worried are you? I’m not personally particularly worried because I feel I don’t fall into the category where I should be majorly category where I should be majorty concerned, category where I should be majorly concerned, from what I have read. It will be, for the majority of us, severe cold or flu—like symptoms. severe cold or ﬂu-like symptoms. Yet a lot severe cold or flu—like symptoms. Yet a lot of what you read implies we should almost be barricading the we should almost be barriading the door is. OK, we should almost be barricading the door is. 0K, 0K, we will get into more specific things in a moment. Xand van Tulleken, how is afraid should we be? I think it is such a good question because everyone I know is wondering how to react to the news we are getting. The first death today, 100 cases, how serious is it? I death today, 100 cases, how serious is it? Iguess death today, 100 cases, how serious is it? Iguessl death today, 100 cases, how serious is it? I guess I would say there is an urgency and the fact that it is dominating the headlines is because every single person in the UK should be changing their behaviour today. The most important thing is hand washing. Hand washing will not reduce your chances of catching it to zero but will dramatically slow the spread. Slowing the spread is very urgent because the number of rases very urgent because the number of cases doubles every few days. A few days ago we had 40—50 cases, now we days ago we had 40-50 cases, now we have 100, in a days ago we had 40—50 cases, now we have 100, in a few days’ time we have 100, in a few days“ time we will have have 100, in a few days’ time we will have 200 and that doubling may well keep going. As it doubles, as Matt said, a small proportion of those people, not necessarily the small proportion that die back 5% or small proportion that die back 596 or 101: will. small proportion that die back 5% or 10% will need intensive care or at 1096 will need intensive rare or at least a high 10% will need intensive care or at least a high dependency unit. Those beds are in short supply at the moment in the NHS, as they always are. So the more we can spread are. So the more we ran spread things out, the are. So the more we can spread things out, the more likely it is we ran provide rare things out, the more likely it is we can provide care to everyone that ran provide rare to everyone that needs can provide care to everyone that needs and keep mortality as low as low as possible. That is the urgency. Everyone should be invested. There are other things you ran do. You invested. There are other things you can do. You should be hygienic in ran do. You should be hygienic in terms of can do. You should be hygienic in terms of catching and killing sneezes and coughs, wiping surfaces. I think everyone should be self—monitoring. If you are concerned, even more normal avoid or infecting other people. Matt and I infecting other peopla. Matt and I properly infecting other people. Matt and I properly don’t disagree with theirs, property don’t disagree with theirs, I think properly don’t disagree with theirs, I think the Government has been very sensible at providing good quality evidence—based information. Personally, I like not handshaking. Not because it may not stop the spread but it makes you think when you walk into a room, we’ll spread but it makes you think when you walk into a room, we’lljust met you walk into a room, we’ll just met backstage and I you walk into a room, we’lljust met backstage and I wouldn’t shake anyone because my hand and it made it intensely awkward as everyone was suddenly talking about coronavirus. I like that. Then you get out the alcohol gel and think about it. You ran do air alcohol gel and think about it. You can do air kisses, you can do a ran do air kisses, you ran do a little hug, a can do air kisses, you can do a little hug, a bow wave, and knuckle bump, however little hug, a bow wave, and knuckle bump, howeveryou little hug, a bow wave, and knuckle bump, however you want to greet people. I bump, however you want to greet people. Ilike bump, however you want to greet people. I like an elbow bump but all peopla. I like an elbow bump but all that people. I like an elbow bump but all that makes people conscious of hygiene. Everyone should be invested, no one shall panic. And you will be demonstrating those things later, Xand! Margaret, how worried should we be? I don’t think we should be afraid but I think we should be wary and cautious and look for sound information. One of the things that strikes me forcibly is that this is going to illuminate all the problems we’ve already got in the problams we’ve already got in our the problems we’ve already got in our health service, which we know it is underfunded and all those things. And it will bring a lot of that time. So I think this is going to be, apart from anything is, a period where peopla be, apart from anything is, a period where people can learn about each where people ran learn about each other, about where people can learn about each other, about what the country’s other, about what the countrrs problams other, about what the country’s problems are, what we need to resolve them and that I think in itself will be important. 50 I don’t itself will be important. So I don’t think we itself will be important. 50 I don’t think we should go about in fear and dread but I don’t think we ought to be silly, either. Tim? I noticed all the loo roll be silly, either. Tim? I noticed all the [00 roll has gone in my be silly, either. Tim? I noticed all the loo roll has gone in my local the loo roll has gone in my [oral supermarket, the [00 roll has gone in my local supermarket, and so is the hand gel as well. I don’t know why people as well. I don’t know why peopla have gone for as well. I don’t know why people have gone for the loo roll, I don’t want to have gone for the [00 roll, I don’t want to know! I can’t think for love nor money. I think the Government is getting it about right, walking a fine line between getting people ready and getting people conscious ready and getting peopla conscious of ready and getting people conscious of the way they are behaving but also not causing too much alarm because there is always a risk you generate so much alarm, that that actually does more damage than the virus itself, at least economically. We don’t want our way of life to be changed forever. That is always what one is conscious about trying to avoid. I want to be able to go back to shaking hands. I’m not going to walk around doing that all day. I want things to go back to normal as soon as possible and therefore any short—term inconvenience we have to short-term inconvenience we have to accept, fair short—term inconvenience we have to accept, fair enough. The goal is to keep ralm, tarry accept, fair enough. The goal is to keep calm, carry on, not get hysterical, because that’s kind of what defines Britain. Layla Moran? I what defines Britain. layla Moran? I think like you, what defines Britain. Layla Moran? I think like you, for myself I’m not actually that worried. I’m young and healthy and that I get it there is a very good chance I will be OK. But I healthy and that I get it there is a very good chance I will be OK. But I am worried for particularly my am worried for particularty my elderty am worried for particularly my elderly grandparents, people who are elderty grandparents, peopla who are more elderly grandparents, people who are more vulnerable. People who perhaps don’t have the same resilience financially as I do. I’ve been doing a lot of work in the last few days, writing to Matt about statutory sick PaY- writing to Matt about statutory sick pay, thinking of those who have writing to Matt about statutory sick pay, thinking of those who havejobs pay, thinking of those who have jobs on pay, thinking of those who havejobs on zero—hours contract and the gig on zero-hours contract and the gig economy, who on zero—hours contract and the gig economy, who have to think hard about do I go to work today or do I do the right thing for other people, do the right thing for other peopla, which is do the right thing for other people, which is to self—isolate if they which is to self-isolate if they have no which is to self—isolate if they have no symptoms and they have been in contact with someone. All credit to the Government, they have been listening and they have now changed those rules. 50 we are trying to all those mles. So we are trying to all work together those rules. 50 we are trying to all work together on this. I think that is really important, that politicians at a time like this do our politicians at a time like this do ourjobs and talk about the most vulnerable constituents that we have. The other people I really do have. The other peopla I really do worry about have. The other people I really do worry about are people like the homeless. I was talking to people in the sector today who are concerned, and I say this talking to Matt, they haven’t had guidance about what to do for peopla, haven’t had guidance about what to do for people, particularly rough do for people, particularty rough sleepers. do for people, particularly rough sleepers. You have to think, if you don’t have a home, how do you self—isolate? I can see you are self-isolate? I ran see you are writing that self—isolate? I can see you are writing that damn, I hope you take that back. At a time like this, we perform a really important that back. At a time like this, we perform a really importantjob, which is to ask the right questions on behalf of the people that we serve and the job of the Government I think it’s to respond and listen. 0K. There is a lot of very practical questions that many of you have asked. I will do a kind of for want asked. I will do a kind offor want of a better asked. I will do a kind of for want of a better phrase, a quickfire round to you, Matt, if I may. A round to you, Matt, ifI may. A quick question round to you, Matt, if I may. A quick question and a reasonably brief answer. I want to get in as many as I ran, brief answer. I want to get in as many as I can,Jim brief answer. I want to get in as many as I can, Jim Docherty? With many as I ran, jim Docherty? with the first many as I can, Jim Docherty? With the first death today, should we now be preventing large gatherings at sport events and theatres? We are looking into the exact science of what the approach should be as the numbers grow. We are still in the phase where we are trying to contain this virus, but also exactly as Xand said, delaying the onset has a big benefit, in terms of the impact on the NHS. Actually, the more we look at the science of this particular virus, the more it is clear that the large-scale virus, the more it is clear that the large—scale events are not necessarily as big spreaders as a lot of people think. The reason for lot of peopla think. The reason for that is the way lot of people think. The reason for that is the way that this virus transmit is through... It’s respiratory, so close proximity. So if you are outdoors and you have the virus, then you would still only be affecting the people near to you. So the most important thing is to get the message that people that have the virus and have the symptoms need to self—isolate. So following the to self-isolate. So following the science to self—isolate. 50 following the science is absolutely at the heart of the Government’s response. If I just also respond to the point from layla, just also respond to the point from Layla, complete entry about how the Government is responding. Cross party in government, I have never seen the Government come together like this, to find the right scientific response to this crisis and try to bring the country together. Another question from Thomas? How will the Government support those who self—isolate due support those who self-isolate due to support those who self—isolate due to coronavirus who aren’t entitled to coronavirus who aren’t entiﬂad to statutory to coronavirus who aren’t entitled to statutory sick pay, like those on zero—hours contracts? It’s an zero-hours contracts? It’s an incredibly zero—hours contracts? It’s an incredibly important question and we have said that people should not be have said that peopla should not be penalised for have said that people should not be penalised for doing the right thing. So we will change the rules on So we will change the mles on statutory So we will change the rules on statutory sick pay but we are also working on making sure that people working on making sure that peopla who are say working on making sure that people who are say self—employed or in an who are say self-employed or in an employment who are say self—employed or in an employment contract that doesn’t allow them to get statutory sick pay because they don’t earn the minimum amount, maybe because they don’t work full—time, to make sure that work full-time, to make sure that they get the work full—time, to make sure that they get the support they need as well. Financial they get the support they need as well. Financialsupport they get the support they need as well. Financial support from the Government? Yes. If we as government are asking people to self—isolate, are asking peopla to self-isolate, then they are asking people to self—isolate, then they shouldn’t be penalised for doing the right thing, which is good for them but good for the whole for them but good for the whola community. for them but good for the whole community. When can we expect an announcement on that? The Prime Minister made the announcement yesterday in broad terms and I’m working with the DWP secretary in the Business Secretary to get the exact rules of that right and then exact mles of that right and then they will go exact rules of that right and then they will go through Parliament. Andrew Flintoff? If I get coronavirus, how should I self—isolate from my family? Another self-isolate from my family? Another important self—isolate from my family? Another important question. People should try to self—isolate from their families. 50 not only go home, try families. So not only go home, try not to go out for families. 50 not only go home, try not to go out for instance shopping, definitely don’t use public transport. But within your home, you should also try to isolate. Look, I’m a father of three children, I understand that that can be difficult and some people have difficult and some peopla have raring difficult and some people have caring responsibilities. But as much raring responsibilities. But as much as possible, caring responsibilities. But as much as possible, stay on your own, even within your own home. So practical things like sharing a bathroom, 3 things like sharing a bathroom, a kitchen? things like sharing a bathroom, 3 kitchen? So long as you wash your hands and wipe down surfaces that you use, you can take these you use, you ran take these precautions. you use, you can take these precautions. Obviously, there are practicalities but the strong advice is to come you possibly can, even is to come you possibly ran, even within your own is to come you possibly can, even within your own home if you are self isolating, keep yourself to yourself. 0K, Nicola? The media seem to help create panic buying. How do we stop causing shortages caused by we stop causing shortages raused by this? we stop causing shortages caused by this? We have already heard about the loo this? We have already heard about the [00 roll! There is this? We have already heard about the loo roll! There is absolutely no need for individuals to go around buying more than they need. In fact, part of the response to this has to be is coming together. We are after all I heard, be is coming together. We are after alll heard, it be is coming together. We are after all I heard, it is biology that is causing the problem. And so the very, very strong advice from the scientists, from the medic says peopla scientists, from the medic says people should not go about buying peopla should not go about buying more people should not go about buying more than they need. I went to the supermarket today. Pasta, no pasta, no dried pasta at all, no toilet rolls as you said earlier, Tim rolls as you said eartier, Tim Foster rolls as you said earlier, Tim Foster people are panic buying. Foster peopla are panic buying. There is Foster people are panic buying. There is no paracetamol or anything like that that you can get in the supermarkets. I understand that but what I would say is the Government has supplies of the key things that are needed and within the food sunplv. are needed and within the food supply, we are absolutely confident that people will, that there won’t that peopla will, that there won’t be a that people will, that there won’t be a problem there. And crucially, we are working with the supermarkets to make sure that if people are self to make sure that if peopla are self isolating, then to make sure that if people are self isolating, then we will be able to get the food and supplies that they need. Louis Mayes? Is a student about to sit A—levels for a place at sit A-levels for a place at university, sit A—levels for a place at university, what will happen if our exams are cut short by the coronavirus? This is another important one. We are doing everything we can to prevent that everything we ran to prevent that happening, everything we can to prevent that happening, subject to keeping people safe. The overall principle is that safe. The overall principla is that the first safe. The overall principle is that the first priority is to keep people safe, and I the first priority is to keep people safe, and Ifeel that very the first priority is to keep people safe, and I feel that very keenly. But we also want to minimise the social and economic disruption. Hence, unlike some other countries that have done this, the scientific advice is clear not to close schools advice is clear not to dose schools and colleges. advice is clear not to close schools and colleges. The message to schools is, don’t close unless you have specifically had advice from Public Health England to do so was that as we come into exam season, obviously we are monitoring that closely and the education department is doing a fantastic job in the education department is doing a fantasticjob in keeping the school fantastic job in keeping the school system fantasticjob in keeping the school system running. But as we get to system mnning. But as we get to exams, we system running. But as we get to exams, we will do all we can to exams, we will do all we ran to allow exams, we will do all we can to allow that to proceed. But of course, you will understand that if we have to take action to keep people safe, we are prepared to do that. One more before I throw it open. Oliver Carter. What are the open. Oliver Carter. what are the government open. Oliver Carter. What are the government doing to tackle the waiting time for coronavirus tests? Yes, getting the test results back is obviously important. I know friends of mine who have had the tests. Lots of people have talked to tests. Lots of peopla have talked to me about tests. Lots of people have talked to me about it. We are getting a new Tech solution into be able to get the results back to people much quicker bust—up and we have a lot of quicker bust-up and we have a lot of peopla on it. So I quicker bust—up and we have a lot of people on it. So I get it and we are peopla on it. So I get it and we are trying to people on it. So I get it and we are trying to make sure that happens as quickly as possible. I am going to go to the audience. Is there anything any of you are burning to are layla? It is anything any of you are burning to are Layla? It is more important than ever to listen to experts. Thank goodness for experts and thank goodness for scientists. We all have to be mindful of what we are reading on Facebook, what we are reading on Twitter, what we might read in certain newspapers. Newspapers are partly responsible for panic buying. You have a choice. You can choose to buy them or not if you see that they are stoking this. We have to become, but listen to the people who know but listen to the peopla who know what but listen to the people who know what they are talking about, epidemiologists, doctors who know epidemiologist, doctors who know their epidemiologists, doctors who know their stuff. epidemiologists, doctors who know theirstuff. I’m epidemiologists, doctors who know their stuff. I’m certainly going to be encouraging all my friends and family to do that. Margaret? I completely agree. It is also important that we have good communication. I know Matt and everybody because politics is aware everybody because politic is aware of that. everybody because politics is aware of that. There has to be trust invoices and people have to listen invoices and peopla have to listen to invoices and people have to listen to them and be able to trust them —— to them and be able to trust them -- tmsted to them and be able to trust them —— trusted voices. And we have to learn tmsted voices. And we have to learn from what trusted voices. And we have to learn from what is happening internationally, even it if it is sometimes what internationally, even it if it is sometimes whatnot internationally, even it if it is sometimes what not to do. I’m going to take another name to question here, but keep your hands up if there are things you want to say was that I know from all the questions coming in when you are right that there are a lot of things you want to ask. Let me go to Kishan Patel. How do you expect an already strained NHS to cope, given that one in 12 NHS posts are vacant and health care professionals would need health rare professionals would need to health care professionals would need to self—isolate for M days if to self-isolate for 14 days if exposed to to self—isolate for M days if exposed to the virus? Are you a exposed to the vims? Are you a health exposed to the virus? Are you a health care worker? Yes. What is health rare worker? Yes. what is your view on health care worker? Yes. What is your view on this? I am worried because on the wards on a day—to—day because on the wards on a day-to-day basis, we are because on the wards on a day—to—day basis, we are already at breaching point and I worry that an asymptomatic patient with the virus infects the wards and we lose 50% or infects the wards and we lose 5096 or even 2596 infects the wards and we lose 50% or even 25% of our workforce. And I even 2596 of our workforce. And I can’t see even 25% of our workforce. And I can’t see how we would be able to deliver a safe service for patients. Xand, from your experience in the health service? It is such an interesting question. My first instinct is to have a massive go at the Tory government and the last ten years of austerity and the fact that the NHS has been starved of cash and the NHS has been starved of rash and starved the NHS has been starved of cash and starved of staff and resources for so long. so long. In fact, I think this represents such a significant burden that no matter what health service a country has, the threat of pandemic disease will always produce disease that will overwhelm a normally functioning health service. So although I share all your concerns about the NHS and the state of it at the moment, our ability to provide the level of intensive care beds, the level of intensive rare beds, which is the level of intensive care beds, which is the main issue because we don’t have a cure for coronavirus, don’t have a cure for coronavims, so if you come don’t have a cure for coronavirus, so if you come into hospital and you are so if you come into hospital and you arejust so if you come into hospital and you are just poorty, so if you come into hospital and you are just poorly, you will not be are just poorty, you will not be achieving are just poorly, you will not be achieving anything more than you could at home. So the majority of peopla stay could at home. So the majority of people stay at home, get a box set, have some lemon and honey and convalesce. If you are deteriorating convalasce. If you are deteriorating and comalasce. If you are deteriorating and you go into convalesce. If you are deteriorating and you go into hospital, the decision is whether you need intensive care, things like ventilation. That is where among the 51: ventilation. That is where among the 596 who ventilation. That is where among the 5% who need that urgent extreme 596 who need that urgent extreme rare, that is 5% who need that urgent extreme care, that is where lives are saved. rare, that is where lives are saved. Those care, that is where lives are saved. Those beds in a major crisis like this are not Those beds in a major crisis like this are notjust going to be Those beds in a major crisis like this are notjust going to beJohn this are not just going to be john from the this are notjust going to beJohn from the normal pool of intensive rare from the normal pool of intensive care beds. Matt will know much more rare beds. Matt will know much more about this care beds. Matt will know much more about this than me, but they will be drawn from the major incident plan is on the big catastrophe plans. 50 is on the big catastrophe plans. So although I is on the big catastrophe plans. 50 although I share your concerns is on the big catastrophe plans. So although I share your concerns about the future of the NHS, in this particular case I think the immediate resources come from elsewhere. I think that is reasonable. We acknowledge that we need more people in the NHS. There was a record number of people was a record number of peopla currently was a record number of people currently working today in the NHS and I’m pleased to see those numbers been going up recently. But Xand is right that the challenge in the NHS at the moment is that demand has been going up. And something like this will add to that. But I would say this as well. The NHS is unbelievably good at responding to crises. They do it in a small way every day in all of the A&Es across every day in all of the Aan across the country. It every day in all of the A&Es across the country. It may have to reconfigure in some ways if this does become a pandemic. That has to be clinically lad does become a pandemic. That has to be clinically led so that the doctors can decide what is the best doctors ran decide what is the best “Y doctors ran decide what is the best way to save doctors can decide what is the best way to save lives, and I will give them the freedom to make the right decisions and we are also making money available if they need it. But it is less about the money and more it is lass about the money and more about how you it is less about the money and more about how you use the resources of the nation best to support people to get through what will be a challenging period. Lots of hands challanging period. Lots of hands are up. The challenging period. Lots of hands are up. The woman in the blue top? I don’t think enough is being done to prevent the disease coming into the country. when prevent the disease coming into the country. When you travel to Asia or country. when you travel to Asia or the country. When you travel to Asia or the Middle East at the moment, you are met at airports with your temperature taken and your symptoms being monitored and then if you have symptoms, I don’t know exactly what happens but the case would have been happens but the use would have been recorded. happens but the case would have been recorded. In this country, you arrive at Heathrow or Gatwick, nothing is done. You might be given a piece of paper saying call 111. a piece of paper saying (211111. You get in a a piece of paper saying call111. You get in a taxi and go to a hotel. There is no hand sanitiser anywhere. In Asia and other parts of the world, they are all over the place. So it seems that anyone coming to this country, nothing is done at the airport, so it is going to spread because there is no prevention. Let me take a few other points. The woman there? This presumably could be our new normal with climate change. with be our new normal with climate change. With increasing temperatures, new pathogens, this has been predicted for a long time. At the same time, we are saying we are all mobilising when actually, there is a lot of cross—party there is a lot of cross-party proactive there is a lot of cross—party proactive action. What can we learn proactive action. what ran we learn from this proactive action. What can we learn from this that we could apply to the larger existential problem that is climate change? The man in the dark blue shirt? Social climate change? The man in the dark blue shirt? Socialfactors climate change? The man in the dark blue shirt? Social factors are also important. Since the outbreak I have seen a spike in races on social media. On public transport my fence have been —— media. On public transport my fence have been -- my media. On public transport my fence have been —— my friends have been have been -- my friends have been targeted and I have been —— my friends have been targeted and I was an attack on an Asian man. What is the government Asian man. what is the government doing to stop Asian man. What is the government doing to stop this racist rhetoric, this is the same government that failed with the Brexit hate from the media. What are you going to do media. what are you going to do about media. What are you going to do about that? And the man in the glasses? I think we as a community ran play a big glasses? I think we as a community can play a big part. It is not glasses? I think we as a community can play a big part. It is notjust ran play a big part. It is not just down to can play a big part. It is notjust down to the NHS and the health professionals. We should be looking out for our neighbours, elderly and vulnerable people that we know. We should help them out as best we can. should help them out as best we ran. Let me get should help them out as best we can. Let me get around the rest of the panel. Tim? On the point about the NHS, I panel. Tim? On the point about the NHS, Iagree panel. Tim? On the point about the NHS, I agree with all the points are being made, but NHS, I agree with all the points are being made, butl NHS, I agree with all the points are being made, but I want to pick on what Margaret said about how this crisis is probably going to expose weaknesses that already exist. In the rase weaknesses that already exist. In the case of the NHS, readers of my the rase of the NHS, readers of my newspaper the the case of the NHS, readers of my newspaper the Telegraph report difficulties getting through on the 111 number, difficulties getting a all 111 number, difficulties getting a call back. There’s the 111 number, difficulties getting a callback. There’s the question of all back. There’s the question of whether callback. There’s the question of whether GPs will be doing visits, because they have stopped doing home visits in many parts of the country for a long time. A&E is already overcrowded. Then you have the problem of people being in hospital problem of peopla being in hospital is at problem of people being in hospital is at the moment who shouldn’t be. They should be in social care. It is They should be in social rare. It is not just an NHS They should be in social care. It is notjust an NHS problem, it is also not just an NHS problam, it is also a social notjust an NHS problem, it is also a social care problem. And listening a social rare problem. And listening to the a social care problem. And listening to the agreement on the panel is fantastic, but as the lady in the audience suggested, I am intrigued as to why we don’t see more of this. Surely there are some problems in our society which are indeed nonpartisan and it would be nice to hear this kind of tone and this kind of working together. If only we could have displayed spirit when it fame could have displayed spirit when it came to the environment or our fame to the environment or our schools came to the environment or our schools and hospitals —— if only we schools and hospitals -- if only we could have schools and hospitals —— if only we could have this blitz spirit. Margaret, let me take you back to the original question, how do you expect an already strained NHS to cope, given that one in 12 NHS posts are vacant and health care professionals would need to self—isolate for a fortnight if self-isolate for a fortnight if exposed? self—isolate for a fortnight if exposed? One of the other things is that this is going to make us look at other things, not that this is going to make us look at other things, notjust the health at other things, not just the health service, at other things, notjust the health service, which most of us think of as hospitals and GPs. But it was raised in the House yesterday in the same, constructive tone, but we don’t yet know what the public health budget is or if there is going to be much of an improvement in the public health budget. Local authorities, particularly if this authorities, particularty if this gets worse, authorities, particularly if this gets worse, will be asked to play a heroic role. They already have great responsibilities for social care responsibilities for social rare which they responsibilities for social care which they are struggling to fulfil. which they are stmggling to fulfil. So one which they are struggling to fulfil. So one of the things that ought to come out of all of this is for us to recognise a come out of all of this is for us to recognise afresh come out of all of this is for us to recognise a fresh the need for long-term recognise a fresh the need for long—term sustained investment. That long-term sustained investment. That goes back to the long—term sustained investment. That goes back to the point the lady raised about climate change. The answer to all of this is to have Proper. answer to all of this is to have proper, long—term planning, whether proper, long-term planning, whether it is for proper, long—term planning, whether it is for floods or feeders. it is for floods or feeders. —— it is for ﬂoods or feeders. -- fevers. We it is for floods or feeders. —— fevers. We have to recognise the challenges of our world and prepare challanges of our world and prepare for challenges of our world and prepare for them on a consistent and thorough basis, taking in all the scientific advice along the way. Layla? | scientific advice along the way. Layla? I completely agree with what layla? I completely agree with what Margaret has Layla? I completely agree with what Margaret has said. With Tim’s point Margaret has said. with Tim’s point about Margaret has said. With Tim’s point about adult social care, there is a about adult social rare, there is a lot of goodwill about adult social care, there is a lot of goodwill in the House and across parties to work on this. But it is a Conservative majority government with a big majority. During the election, I remember Boris During the election, I remember BorisJohnson saying that During the election, I remember Boris Johnson saying that within During the election, I remember BorisJohnson saying that within the Boris johnson saying that within the first BorisJohnson saying that within the first 100 days, he would convene a cross-party first 100 days, he would convene a cross—party commission to look at cross-party commission to look at this cross—party commission to look at this intractable problem and to help us find a solution. It is day 84 today and we still haven’t seen that, so today and we still haven’t seen that, sol today and we still haven’t seen that, so I guess my plea would be to the government, you need to show some leadership. That is how governments work. The government ‘s use this stuff and then parliament use this stuff and then partiament will engage use this stuff and then parliament will engage with it. But the government has to initiate it. I hope we will get on and solve some of these big issues, because it can’t wait any longer. But, do you want to answer some of the questions put by members of the audience? The lady talking about people coming lady talking about peopla coming into lady talking about people coming into the country, for example. Yes, I will answer as many as I can. I I will answer as many as I ran. I agree on a point I will answer as many as I can. I agree on a point in social care and agree on a point in social rare and we will agree on a point in social care and we will fulfil that manifesto commitment. The point about people commitment. The point about peopla coming into the commitment. The point about people coming into the country, I have been asked about this a lot. The thing is that if this virus becomes established around the world, then there is no way of stopping it getting to Britain eventually. So the decision was, do you try to shut ourselves off as a nation and delay it, and if it does go pandemic in the rest of the world, it is inevitable that it would come here? Or inevitable that it would come here? 0rdo inevitable that it would come here? Or do you try to keep as much normal life as possibla Or do you try to keep as much normal life as possible and tackle it by life as possibla and tackla it by finding life as possible and tackle it by finding those who do come into the country and are then symptomatic? So you rightly got a leaflet saying you rightly got a leaﬂet saying that you rightly got a leaflet saying that if you rightly got a leaﬂet saying that if you you rightly got a leaflet saying that if you had a symptom, you should call 111 and if you had a should (211111 and if you had a symptom, no should call 111 and if you had a symptom, no doubt you would have rallad symptom, no doubt you would have called 111. Lots of people did and rallad 111. Lots of peopla did and that was called 111. Lots of people did and that was how we found many of the cases. There was one country in Europe that chose to stop the ﬂights, and Europe that chose to stop the flights, and that was Italy. And ﬂights, and that was Italy. And they flights, and that was Italy. And they became the European epicentre of this epidemic. In a way, that really demonstrated to me how we must follow the science. Of course there are pressures on me to do things which people feel intuitively things which peopla feel intuitively that they things which people feel intuitively that they are right and I understand where you are coming from on this. But we have to follow the science and the epidemiology, and our Chief Medical Officer, 3 shout out to Medical Officer, a shout out to Chris Medical Officer, 3 shout out to Chris Whitty, brilliant scientist. Chris whitty, brilliant scientist. He is Chris Whitty, brilliant scientist. He is the voice of calm reason. He is one of the most experienced epidemiologists in the world and he said to me, if we stop the flights, said to me, if we stop the ﬂights, with all said to me, if we stop the flights, with all the consequences that brings, it would only delay the arrival of this disease here by a matter of days, but it would also make it harder for us to get medicines into this country that we need, because many of them are produced abroad. What about ticking produced abroad. what about ticking people’s produced abroad. What about ticking people’s temperatures at the airport? Checking the temperature doesn’t have an effect. The reason is that you get lots of false positives. You get lots of people positives. You get lots of peopla who positives. You get lots of people who have a temperature and it is not for coronavims, who have a temperature and it is not for coronavirus, so you end up for coronavims, so you end up spending for coronavirus, so you end up spending huge amount of resources and not spotting the people. The Americans tried checking temperatures. It may have reassured peopla. It has temperatures. It may have reassured people. It has had no impact on the peopla. It has had no impact on the spread of people. It has had no impact on the spread of the virus there, and the Italians also did it. So I hear spread of the virus there, and the Italians also did it. Sol hear all Italians also did it. So I hear all these things Italians also did it. Sol hear all these things and I instinctively agree with many of them. It is a bit like the point about the mass gatherings. I understand why it seems intuitive that that is the right thing to do, but the judgment that I made with the prime minister at the start of this is that we are going to listen very hard to the scientists. We are going to think through this problem as a country and they are going to try to have the best possible response despite the pressures, and then it is incumbent on us to explain why we are taking the approach that we are. get the food and supplies that they need. Before we carry on, I want to tell you next week is budget week. Next week in West Bromwich and the following week in Weston—super—Mare. following week in Weston-super-Mare. If you want to following week in Weston—super—Mare. If you want to be in the audience you ran all or If you want to be in the audience you can call or go to the Question you ran all or go to the Question Time you can call or go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions. Who knows where we instructions. who knows where we will be instructions. Who knows where we will be with this story next week or the week after. Let me take another will be with this story next week or the week after. Let me take another question now from Chris Belton. question now from Chris Bolton. Thank you. question now from Chris Belton. Thank you. How will the government ensure that providers of adult social care are sufficiently resourced to respond to the demands of coronavirus? You touched a little bit on that but that is something a lot of peopla bit on that but that is something a lot of people have been asking lot of peopla have been asking about. I lot of people have been asking about. I will come back to you in a minute. You can deal with all these minute. You ran deal with all these questions in minute. You can deal with all these questions in some shape or form. layla, do you questions in some shape or form. Layla, do you want to kick this off? layla, do you want to kick this off? This is Layla, do you want to kick this off? This is probably the thing that worries me the most in my own family... who is worries me the most in my own family... Who is going to be there family... who is going to be there to look family... Who is going to be there to look after the older generation, especially as there is about one in ten jobs to fill in that sector? I think it’s 122,000 people are needed. And if at any one time 20% needed. And if at any one time 2096 of them go off needed. And if at any one time 20% of them go off sick, who will fill in the gaps? I think this is why we I needed to solve this earlier. We I needed to solve this eartier. We have to I needed to solve this earlier. We have to do our best moving forward and there will be people covering for people at a time like this, the for peopla at a time like this, the same for people at a time like this, the same with the NHS, in the end it will be the doctors and nurses, it will be care staff who will cover will be rare staff who will cover for will be care staff who will cover for other care staff and burn themselves out and they will rise to the challenge, I have absolutely no the challange, I have absolutely no doubt. I the challenge, I have absolutely no doubt. I thank them from the bottom of my heart and I’m sure others as well as well, for what they are going to do, but nevertheless, we need to solve this problem as soon as possible. I very much hope that this is the wake—up call that our this is the wake-up call that our country needs this is the wake—up call that our country needs for issues like adult social rare, country needs for issues like adult social care, also climate change, social rare, also climate change, also the social care, also climate change, also the others, because we can’t wait. Chris, do you work in social rare? Curry wait. Chris, do you work in social rare? Curryl wait. Chris, do you work in social rare? Curry I do. wait. Chris, do you work in social care? Curry I do. What do you do and rare? Curry I do. what do you do and what are your care? Curry I do. What do you do and what are your concerns? I work in a rare centre, what are your concerns? I work in a care centre, people with dementia. rare centre, people with dementia. But I’m care centre, people with dementia. But I’m also concerned about people But I’m also concerned about peopla living at But I’m also concerned about people living at home on their own or with carers who may be elderly themselves. It is about the number of support staff who can help those of support staff who ran help those peopla. But I of support staff who can help those people. But I would imagine the peopla. But I would imagine the peopla that people. But I would imagine the people that run the services are people that nm the services are also saying people that run the services are also saying we can’t do it without additional financial resources. also saying we can’t do it without additionalfinancial resources. I additional financial resources. I think additionalfinancial resources. I think that is a key issue as well. In your rare think that is a key issue as well. In your care centre are you having In your rare centre are you having these In your care centre are you having these conversations? The government has talked about a worst—case has talked about a worst-case scenario, has talked about a worst—case scenario, one in five falling ill, about what you would do, how you would look after the people you care would look after the peopla you rare for? I would look after the people you care for? I think there are often crisis is within care centres brought on by is within rare centres brought on by different is within care centres brought on by different things. This is probably the most challenging. I think people the most challanging. I think peopla are the most challanging. I think peopla arejust the most challenging. I think people arejust waiting, the most challenging. I think people are just waiting, knowing that they will respond in some way, providing they are well enough and if they are not well enough, that their colleagues will do it on their behalf. Right, you step in and do your best. Margaret? Well, I was your best. Margaret? Well, Iwas just thinking, it your best. Margaret? Well, I was just thinking, it goes back to what the gentleman at the back said. In the gentleman at the hack said. In the end, I the gentleman at the back said. In the end, I suspect, I the gentleman at the back said. In the end, I suspect, Ifear, the gentleman at the back said. In the end, Isuspect, Ifear, that the gentleman at the back said. In the end, I suspect, I fear, that if the end, Isuspect, Ifear, that if it does get bad, the end, I suspect, I fear, that if it does get bad, we will rely on people to volunteer to help others and a sense of community and everybody looking after each other. And actually, although this is a terribly worrying situation, I’d rather like the idea that help and cooperation and friendliness and people being nice to each other for a change, may spread. APPLAUSE Talking of cooperation, one of the suggestions that has come from government is the doctors, nurses who have retired to come back into help. Is there anyone here in that situation who might consider... Yes, you and the front? We will situation who might consider... Yes, you and the front? We willjust get you and the front? We will just get a microphone you and the front? We willjust get a microphone two, one second. Yes, so you are a forward nurse or doctor? Retired staff nurse, I retired 15 years ago. I doctor? Retired staff nurse, I retired 15 years ago. Ijust doctor? Retired staff nurse, I retired 15 years ago. I just feel... I wouldn’t feel very comfortable after being away for so long, back in the workplace. Then there is also the question of registration. I have given up my registration, so that would need to be taken care of as would need to be taken rare of as well. You would need to be taken care of as well. You would have to train for that? There is a back to nursing course, yes, you would have to do a back to nursing course. Is it something that appeals to you or does it seem impractical? Not at my age! Xand com you have been a practising doctor age! Xand com you have been a practising doctorfor a age! Xand com you have been a practising doctor for a while. age! Xand com you have been a practising doctorfor a while. I practising doctor for a while. I spent ten practising doctorfor a while. I spent ten years working in the NHS but I haven’t in years. No one has contacted me yet to demand my services. I could always swap in as my identical twin brother who is front line NHS staff and he would be grateful for that. front line NHS staff and he would be gratefulforthat. I front line NHS staff and he would be grateful for that. I totally echo what you are saying. It is enormously, you don’t have to have been out of practice for very long to be de—skilled. I think the idea to be tie-skilled. I think the idea of a Dad’s to be de—skilled. I think the idea of a Dad’s Army of health care professionals is quite charming, quite British. I do think that there is an enormous role for individuals is an enormous rola for individuals with is an enormous role for individuals with expertise to provide help and rare in with expertise to provide help and care in their communities, to their rare in their communities, to their family care in their communities, to their family members. I would certainly be prepared to step up in that. But the issue of registration, terms of response polity, insurance, payment, all these things are pretty complicated. It feels to me like that as a backbone of the response won’t be a significant contribution. I would say, I think a couple of peopla have I would say, I think a couple of people have raised this idea and Margaret raised it so eloquently of us helping each other. This epidemic demonstrates one thing incredibly dearty. That demonstrates one thing incredibly clearly. That we are all as vulnerable as the most vulnerable people among us. When you look peopla among us. when you look across people among us. When you look across the Atlantic, you see a group of peopla, 30 across the Atlantic, you see a group of people, 30 million Americans with of peopla, 30 million Americans with no of people, 30 million Americans with no insurance or access to adequate health care and many of them in health rare and many of them in precarious health care and many of them in precarious employment. We have a better social safety net and institution and we should treasure it because those are the things that keep us safe. APPLAUSE On the point about social care On the point about social rare funding I On the point about social care funding I don’t want to break up the Kumbaya moment. Is that what you are falling Kumbaya moment. Is that what you are calling it?! All three parties have been in power and have failed to tackle the issue of the funding formula for the care sector. That formula for the rare sector. That includes formula for the care sector. That includes the Lib Dems. One reason why they have failed to do that is because of budget cuts, austerity, which was passed on to local government, which is where so many sacrifices were made. Local governments couldn’t raise taxes unless they had a referendum so they didn’t have the funds to do it. And politicians were reluctant to ask us to sell a property or two in some “Y to sell a property or two in some way after we have passed on, to use that property to finance our own rare. So that property to finance our own care. 50 the reason why the money rare. So the reason why the money isn’t there care. 50 the reason why the money isn’t there is because this issue has been dodged. On the point about volunteering and stepping up. People of course do that all the time already. People do that by caring already. People do that by raring for their already. People do that by caring for their relatives as it is. I’ve been thinking about this crisis from a Christian perspective. It strikes me that back in the dim and distant past, whenever something odd like this happened, people always assumed it was a punishment from God. Western society has changed. Increasingly, the way we theologically think about disasters like this is it is a test of us. when like this is it is a test of us. When one asks where is God in this when one asks where is God in this scenario? When one asks where is God in this scenario? It is in whether or not we step up and do our duty. 50 this is step up and do our duty. So this is awful, peopla step up and do our duty. 50 this is awful, people are worried. We will awful, peopla are worried. We will get through it, awful, people are worried. We will get through it, I’m sure. Look upon it also as a test of us, as individuals. I think right now, it feels as though we are passing that test. APPLAUSE So, test. APPLAUSE 50, Matt, picking up on two of the So, Matt, picking up on two of the things. The 50, Matt, picking up on two of the things. The concerns about So, Matt, picking up on two of the things. The concerns about who will look after those who can’t look after themselves in a social care after themselves in a social rare setting, for after themselves in a social care setting, for example. Then this idea of getting a Dad’s Army... Of doctors and nurses. On that point... On that point first of all, are you considering changing registration or relaxing the rules so doctors and relaxing the mles so doctors and nurses relaxing the rules so doctors and nurses can come back more easily? nurses ran come back more easily? Yes. We do nurses can come back more easily? Yes. We do want people who are qualified but also especially those who are... Who have very recent who are... who have very recent experience, to who are... Who have very recent experience, to be able to come back in. We will change the rules around in. We will change the mles around registration in. We will change the rules around registration that were raised to make that easier. And also make it easier to volunteer, because volunteers, so the point about the community having a role to play, community having a rola to play, volunteering, community having a role to play, volunteering, people volunteering to help, for instance in social care, help, for instance in social rare, is incredibly help, for instance in social care, is incredibly important. But you have to make sure you get the skill set right, so that treatment is safe and people are looked after. So volunteers, people making a volunteers, peopla making a voluntary volunteers, people making a voluntary effort is really, really important and will be one part of the response. But it couldn’t by no means he the whole part. I’m also the Secretary of State for so care. the Secretary of State for so rare. Getting the the Secretary of State for so care. Getting the response rate in social rare is Getting the response rate in social care is absolutely vital for this. rare is absolutely vital for this. Not care is absolutely vital for this. Not least because one of the facets of this virus is that... The impact is are highly correlated with age. One of the saving graces is children appear not to have any symptoms except in a rare number of cases. But it does have a particularly bad But it does have a particularty bad impact on But it does have a particularly bad impact on people either with pre—existing health conditions or pre-existing health conditions or who are pre—existing health conditions or who are older. What will you do when who are older. what will you do when the carers who are older. What will you do when the carers are ill? We are putting more money on, there is an increase in [oral authority more money on, there is an increase in local authority budgets coming at in [oral authority budgets coming at the end in local authority budgets coming at the end of this month, so they can the end of this month, so they ran plan for that the end of this month, so they can plan for that now. And making sure that that resource is there, that is important, but so also is the staff, exactly as you said. It is particularly important in social particularty important in social rare, in a particularly important in social care, in a residential setting, rare, in a residential setting, where many care, in a residential setting, where many of the residents themselves will be frail and older. So this themselves will be frail and older. 50 this is a particular concern. We So this is a particular concern. We have more guidance for you coming out next week. It is something we are working incredibly hard on. On the longer term point... Boris johnson said the longer term point... Boris Johnson said he had a plan ready to johnson said he had a plan ready to go on the steps Johnson said he had a plan ready to go on the steps of Downing Street? It is best done on a cross—party It is best done on a cross-party basis. I It is best done on a cross—party basis. I think the spirit of this panel is a good run in order to make panel is a good nm in order to make changes to social panel is a good run in order to make changes to social care. My thought changes to social rare. My thought is the changes to social care. My thought is the reason it hasn’t been cracked under governments of all colours over the last 20 years has been... It’s been a failure of political economy rather than of policy. I also point out, we had choices and in elections Liberal Democrats put forward things like a penny on the pound on income tax to go directly into the NHS and adult social care. into the NHS and adult social rare. So I reject that into the NHS and adult social care. 50 I reject that it is a case that So I reject that it is a use that we So I reject that it is a case that we haven’t been brave enough to ask. But I really hope that this cross—party commission is going to cross-party commission is going to come up with cross—party commission is going to come up with how do we sustainably longer term fund this issue? Because unless we do this cross—party, it is unless we do this cross-party, it is going to be a ten, unless we do this cross—party, it is going to be a ten, 20 year endeavour and I’m deeply concerned that it is going to get dodged again and kicked into the long grass. Let’s meet up when we are back and the offer is there for you as well, Margaret, and let’s take this forward. We had a cross-party let’s take this forward. We had a cross—party commission when Andy cross-party commission when Andy Burnham cross—party commission when Andy Burnham was Secretary of State. It got very close, we thought, to agreement. Then David Cameron pulled the plug end we haven’t had a successful one since. I can see quite a few of you have your hands up. I’m going to move on, if I may. As you take your hands down, I’m sorry! The question I am coming to Next, lots of you asked about this as well. I don’t think I would be doing the right thing if we didn’t come to it. I would like to hear from Dale Fairless, please. Has from Dale Fairlass, please. Has Priti from Dale Fairless, please. Has Priti Patel’s position as Home Secretary Priti Patel’s position as Home Secretary become untenable after the recent claims of bullying? Margaret, do you want to kick us off on that? It dearty has do you want to kick us off on that? It clearly has become untenable because she is still there. LAUGHTER because she is still there. MUGHTER Do you think because she is still there. LAUGHTER Do you think she will last? I think it’s getting close. I think the thing that is... She’s clearly... thing that is... She’s dearty... This isn’t thing that is... She’s clearly... This isn’t somebody I know well, at all. Looking at the range of comments, it does seem to me that she is somebody who can be very she is somebody who ran be very charming to she is somebody who can be very charming to important colleagues around her and they all think she’s absolutely great, but if you are not an important collie, it might not be quite so easy. I think the thing that is difficult for her is that there is a pattern and there is a whole set of different departments. If it was one department, you might think that was it. It is in three of the four government departments she’s worked in. One thing that is important to say, it gets very misleading. In my experience, which is reasonably substantial, there is nothing civil servants like more than a minister who knows what they want and nothing they hate more than a minister who doesn’t know what they want. So the notion that somehow this civil service doesn’t like ministers who have policies that they want to pursue and know how they want to go about it is just rubbish. Of course, what the minister wants is unrealistic or unlawful or something, minister wants is unrealistic or unlawful orsomething, I minister wants is unrealistic or unlawful or something, I appreciate it may be difficult. Tim? APPLAUSE This is more like it, we can go back This is more like it, we ran go back to tearing lumps This is more like it, we can go back to tearing lumps out of each other. Less Kumbaya! Exactly. Two things. One is that it feels like there is a party political briefing operation against Priti Patel taking place. Secondly, there is a broad context which is that the government has a lot it wants to do in the next year and probably the Home Office has more than any other department has to do, including things like tackling knife crime and introducing a new immigration system in time for the proper Brexit when it finally comes. So the Home Secretary is probably cracking the whip and trying to get civil servants to do things which in some cases, they possibly don’t feel they have the resources or the time to do. And unfortunately, one suspects some of the civil servants don’t want to do these things. We can’t say if these allegations are true, but some of them go back about five years, well before what you are talking about. That element is a he said/ she said thing. If there’s any bullying in any department, including John Bercow if he was guilty of that, that would be unacceptable too. If Priti Patel was guilty of that, that would be acceptable. But I think would be acceptabla. But I think there is would be acceptable. But I think there is a political context to this which makes me suspicious of some of the politics going on behind the the politic going on behind the scenes. the politics going on behind the scenes. She has a lot of things that she wants to get done and unfortunately, parts of the civil service have come to regard themselves as a sort of constitutional checkup on the executive, that they are there to say, you can’t do this or that. That is not acceptable because whatever you think of Priti Patel, she is the elected representative of the people. The civil service is there to help her get get done what the people have voted to do. people have voted to do. Our civil service are better and more professional at doing that than almost any other civil service in the world, and respected across the world. world. And the New Labour, at least world. And the New labour, at least one Home world. And the New Labour, at least one Home Secretary described the civil service is not fit for purpose. When you have a radical purpose. when you have a radical government, purpose. When you have a radical government, you always get the civil service saying they don’t know what they are doing. The woman in the front? I was going to say, this lady has had problems in three departments. They are allegations, you can’t come to a conclusion about that. She denies them. She also had to leave the government previously because she was talking to the Israeli government or something like that. So it’s not the first time something has not that. So it’s not the first time something has notjust been an something has not just been an allegation. something has notjust been an allegation. The woman in the black and white top? Could it be that certain members of the civil service are using accusations of bullying to hide behind, when in fact, it may be laziness, resistance to change or incompetence? And the man in the blue sweater? I wonder whether there is an element of sexism. Her behaviour in a man is an element of sexism. Her behaviour in a men might be seen as behaviour in a man might be seen as assertive, but in Priti Patel, it is interpreted as being bullying. What interpreted as being bullying. what do the panel interpreted as being bullying. What do the panel think of that? Well, first of all, I think we need a proper investigation into this that is actually independent. is actually independent. As with anyone who faces allegations like this at work, we would expect that the right process is followed, but my concern is that that independent investigation is going to be done by the Cabinet Office, and I don’t think that that is very independent. It needs to be properly independent. It needs to be property independent. But It needs to be properly independent. But what it does speak to in my view, and let’s leave Priti Patel to one side because there is a broader bullying culture that is emanating from Number Ten. We have seen Dominic Cummings firing large numbers of special advisers. My understanding is that one of them is suing Number Ten for wrongful dismissal. And I believe that obviously, bullying and harassment have no place in any organisation. Number Ten should not be exempt from that. But you also set the tone from government. You set the tone not just for the civil service, but the whole of the country. We have been talking today about compassion and pulling together and wouldn’t it be wonderful if we were nicer to each other? Well, I’m sorry to say that also applies to the way people treat each other in government, in partiament each other in government, in parliament and in our institutions partiament and in our institutions because parliament and in our institutions because it matters and it filters into society. If we are serious about that, we should be worried and take these allegations against Priti Patel and others in government very seriously. We deserve better than them. Xand. them. Xand. I couldn’t agree more with layla. You them. Xand. I couldn’t agree more with Layla. You raise the issue of with layla. You raise the issue of sexism. with Layla. You raise the issue of sexism. One thing that does concern me in the conversation about Priti Patel, she is too many people on the left one of the least likeable members of the Cabinet. Her support for the death penalty, 3 members of the Cabinet. Her support for the death penalty, a wavering support for the death penalty, the overall agenda of the Home Office seems particularly efficient and unpleasant. So there is a seems particularly efficient and unpleasant. So there is atone —— unpleasant. So there is a tone -- the agenda unpleasant. So there is atone —— the agenda seems vicious, so there is a tone the agenda seems vicious, so there is atone which seems equally is a tone which seems equally unpleasant. In general, the nastiness of the rhetoric around the party political positions on social media does trickle down. I work a media does trickla down. I work a lot with media does trickle down. I work a lot with schools and film with children and we are seeing a rise in bullying and a rise in nastiness. Coming out of Number Ten for sure, but also coming out of an adult class that is increasingly divided. So in exposing concern about Priti Patel, of course there should be an investigation. It is also important that peopla investigation. It is also important that people who don’t like her and that peopla who don’t like her and are that people who don’t like her and are concerned about these allegations do not then adopt that tone themselves. Has her position become untenable? I am not in the become untenabla? I am not in the Home Office, become untenable? I am not in the Home Office, so until there is an investigation, it is impossible to say, but it is concerning. Let’s talk about this investigation in a moment. Given what has been set on the panel here and given the allegations about Priti Patel going back five years, when did you first hear concerns about her behaviour? when I hear concerns about her behaviour? When I turned on my TV on a Saturday when I turned on my TV on a Saturday and saw the When I turned on my TV on a Saturday and saw the resignation of one of the civil servants. In the Home Office? 50 nothing was heard by you Office? So nothing was heard by you prior to that? Absolutely not. I know Priti Patel well. I have worked with her a lot. She is determined. She certainly wants to get her agenda through and that is what we want in a Home Secretary. In my experience, and all the conversations and dealings I have had with her and her team, she has always been courteous, polite and straightforward. So were you surprised by the allegations, and so many of them? Yes, I am. It is vital that we have an investigation. That is under way. It has Alex Allan, who is independent. Is that into the allegations from all three departments? It is into all of the facts. I don’t think we should be jumping to conclusions before we have the facts. I think the agenda that Priti is pursuing is probably closer to the views of the British people and home affairs in terms of peopla and home affairs in terms of putting in people and home affairs in terms of putting in place controls on immigration and more police, than any Home Secretary for many decades. And I support her in doing that. But Matt, today is World Book Day. One of my favourite books is Harry Potter. Here is a quote from serious black, who was himself bullied. If you want to judge a man, black, who was himself bullied. If you want tojudge a man, or in this use a woman, you want tojudge a man, or in this case a women, look at how they treat use a woman, look at how they treat their inferiors, case a women, look at how they treat their inferiors, not their peers. —— their inferiors, not their peers. -- a quote from their inferiors, not their peers. —— a quote from Sirius Black their inferiors, not their peers. —— a quote from Sirius Black. In this use, if a quote from Sirius Black. In this use, ifI a quote from Sirius Black. In this use, if I were a quote from Sirius Black. In this case, if I were Priti Patel and I use, if I were Priti Pateland I were hearing case, if I were Priti Patel and I were hearing these allegations, and you are hearing these as well, are you really so comfortable backing her to the hilt in the way you are? There are others who could drive through the mandate that you want to get through, and I completely disagree with a lot of it. The Home Office, by the way, in my constituency surgery, that hostile environment still exists. Windrush environment still exists. windmsh citizens environment still exists. Windrush citizens now, this is a department that does desperately need leadership but needs a lot of compassion and a lot of change, but not in this direction. Are you really that comfortable backing her in really that comfortable hacking her in the way really that comfortable backing her in the way that you are? I would certainly be uncomfortable with taking the position, as you seem to have done, of presuming her guilty before you have seen the facts. before you have seen the facts. The man in the checked shirt there? Do we really need a long, expensive, drawn—out independent investigation drawn-out independent investigation for drawn—out independent investigation for claims that she allegedly may for claims that she allagedly may have for claims that she allegedly may have shouted at someone three or four years ago? Because you think it doesn’t matter because you have already made your mind up? Not that it doesn’t matter, but there are more important issues we could be looking at as opposed to someone alloyedly looking at as opposed to someone allegedly shouting at someone. There are a lot of anti—Semitism claims in are a lot of anti-Semitism claims in the labour Party. are a lot of anti—Semitism claims in the Labour Party. That deserves an the labour Party. That deserves an independent the Labour Party. That deserves an independent investigation. It is being investigated by the Equality and Human Rights Commission. Is that the same as shouting at someone a few years ago? I am not sure it is. The man in the glasses. What would The man in the glasses. what would the The man in the glasses. What would the consequences be if she were found guilty of the allegations? Would she be expected to resign or would she retain her position? That is a matter for the would she retain her position? That is a matterfor the prime minister. is a matter for the prime minister. But we is a matterfor the prime minister. But we haven’t reached that because we want to get to the bottom of allegations. It is reasonable to allagations. It is reasonabla to investigate allegations. It is reasonable to investigate allegations. What is unreasonable is people who disagree with her policies saying she should be got rid of before that has even happened. It is ironic that the Home Secretary is not getting due justice. That doesn’t seem quite fair. fair. There is a presumption of guilt in this conversation. I didn’t say that an Layla didn’t say that say that an layla didn’t say that either. I say that an Layla didn’t say that either. I said say that an Layla didn’t say that either. Isaid I say that an Layla didn’t say that either. I said I don’t know what is happening in the Foreign Office —— happening in the Foreign Office -- Home happening in the Foreign Office —— Home Office, but it’s important to investigate and it’s important that we do not create a culture of bullying against Priti Patel, no matter what we think of some of her odious policies. I was very clear about that. Let me hear more from the audience. Given the number of senior ministers who have already shown their support for Priti Patel, is a ministerial investigation then tmly is a ministerial investigation then truly independent? It isn’t a ministerial investigation, it’s an investigation by the Cabinet Office with the independent adviser to the Cabinet Office, so Alex Allan. And let that investigation go ahead. Imagine an alternative scenario, which is simply the allegations are made and the prime minister immediately dropped her. That would set a dreadful president at the beginning of this government. The message it would send to the civil service is, if you don’t like policies of your senior minister, make a complaint and get rid of them. Hold on, you are saying that these civil servants don’t like the policies. How do you know that? You can’t know that. This is why an investigation is so important. The question I was asking is, why is Boris question I was asking is, why is BorisJohnson and you so comfortable Boris johnson and you so comfortable backing her to BorisJohnson and you so comfortable backing her to the hilt in the way hacking her to the hilt in the way that you are? backing her to the hilt in the way that you are? Let’s put it to an investigation. Why go and say she is investigation. why go and say she is wonderful, investigation. Why go and say she is wonderful, she has always been lovely to me? So she supposed to go into purdah for the next six months and hide from the public during the investigation? She has to her and hide from the public during the investigation? She has to herjob. investigation? She has to her job. But ran investigation? She has to herjob. But can we stop suggesting that But ran we stop suggesting that civil But can we stop suggesting that civil servants are somehow constructing some kind of conspiracy? We have spent the first part of this programme talking about how we need to treat each other with respect and listen to experts. There are many expert people in the civil service who are well worth listening to and deserve our respect. We are almost out of time. It is vital in this country that people are innocent and not resumed guilty until the facts are established. But the final thing that is so critical is that civil servants, medics, the is that civil servants, media, the NHS and is that civil servants, medics, the NHS and ministers work together closely on this great crisis of coronavirus that we were talking about for most of the programme. It shows that this is a completely separate question. The way that ministers and civil servants can and ministers and civil servants ran and do work ministers and civil servants can and do work together across government has just been shown in exemplary fashion on the coronavirus issue and is fashion on the coronavims issue and is continuing fashion on the coronavirus issue and is continuing 24/7 to keep people is continuing 24/7 to keep peopla safe. I’m is continuing 24/7 to keep people safe. I’m afraid our time is up. The agreement lasted quite a lot of the programme and then agreement lasted quite a lot of the programme and thenjust agreement lasted quite a lot of the programme and then just vanished, but we enjoyed it while it was there. Next week we are in West Brom which in the following week we are in Weston—super—Mare. in Weston—super—Mare. If you want to in Weston-super-Mare. If you want to have your say on in Weston—super—Mare. If you want to have your say on tonight’stopics and have your say on tonight’stopis and marry on have your say on tonight’stopis and carry on this have your say on tonight’stopics and carry on this conversation, you can carry on this conversation, you ran join Adrian Chiles carry on this conversation, you can join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time Extra Time, which is always is on 5 Live right now. But for now, you very much of the panel. Thank you to all of you for your points on your questions, and of course to you at home for watching and listening. From Tunbridge Wells, bye-bye