Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Alok Sharma, minister under Theresa May, promoted to cabinet by Boris minister under Theresa May, promoted to cabinet by BorisJohnson then to cabinet by Boris johnson then appointed to cabinet by BorisJohnson then appointed Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy in February, weeks before lockdown. Labour Strategy in February, weeks before lockdown. Labourshadow Strategy in February, weeks before lockdown. Labour shadow secretary lockdown. labour shadow secretary for lockdown. Labour shadow secretary for Northern Ireland, elected to Westminster five years ago at age 27. Westminster five years ago at age 27, she’s been a member of the shadow ministerial team ever since, Louise Haigh. Ed Davey, the new leader of the Liberal Democrats, replacing jo leader of the Liberal Democrats, replacing Jo Swinson, formerly replacing jo Swinson, formerty Energy and replacing Jo Swinson, formerly Energy and Climate Change Secretary Energy and (limate Change Secretary in the Energy and Climate Change Secretary in the 2010 coalition government under David Cameron. Joining us down under David Cameron. joining us down the line under David Cameron. Joining us down the line from Edinburgh, Devi Sridhar, professor of global public health at Edinburgh university and a member of the Scottish Government’s corona visor —— coronavirus advisory corona visor -- coronavirus advisory committee, and corona visor —— coronavirus advisory committee, and founder and boss of Oakman Inns, Peter Borg—Neal. Good Oakman Inns, Peter Borg-Neal. Good evening and Oakman Inns, Peter Borg—Neal. Good evening and welcome to my guests in the studio and to Devi Sridhar. Thank you for the studio and to Devi Sridhar. Thank you forjoining us down the Thank you for joining us down the line. We Thank you forjoining us down the line. We have our live audience with us again virtually. This evening you are all from Chingford, so hello. Good to have you with us. Let’s hear what you have to say. For all of you watching at home, you can what you have to say. For all of you watching at home, you canjoin in watching at home, you ranjoin in the watching at home, you canjoin in the conversation on social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s get going with our BBC Question Time. Let’s get going with ourfirst question, BBC Question Time. Let’s get going with our first question, which BBC Question Time. Let’s get going with ourfirst question, which is with our first question, which is from with ourfirst question, which is from Sinem Ishlek. How does the new from Sinem Ishlak. How does the new job Support from Sinem Ishlek. How does the new Job Support Scheme help those who job Support Scheme help those who still Job Support Scheme help those who still have their industry shut or massively reduced because of the pandemic? We heard about the massively reduced because of the pandemic? We heard about theJob pandemic? We heard about the job Support pandemic? We heard about theJob Support Scheme today from the Chancellor. It was welcome to see the Chancellor announced some of the measures today. Labour has been measures today. labour has been falling for measures today. Labour has been calling for several months now for falling for several months now for the furlough calling for several months now for the furlough scheme to be extended in a targeted and specific way to address exactly the industries you have just mentioned, those industries which are still not able to be up and running because of to be up and mnning because of social to be up and running because of social distancing and lockdown measures. Do you think this goes far enough in terms of industries which have been shut or massively reduced? No, there are not the measures for those industries that are not yet viable because the law doesn’t allow them to be, there are not measures for people that are self—employed for peopla that are self-employed and for people that are self—employed and cannot get back to work, and we have to be honest and recognise there is a jobs have to be honest and recognise there is 3 jobs crisis here and now. there is a jobs crisis here and now. 750,000 there is 3 jobs crisis here and now. 750,000 people have lost their there is 3 jobs crisis here and now. 750,000 people have lost theirjobs 750,000 peopla have lost theirjobs already this 750,000 people have lost theirjobs already this year. That 750,000 personal tragedies, and I didn’t hear anything from the Chancellor today about retraining or about creating new today about retraining or about creating newjobs and, with the measures as they are, not being anywhere near significant enough to protect against a second wave of anywhere near significant enough to protect against a second wave ofjob losses, I would say increasing an implement is inevitable. So would labour implement is inevitable. So would Labour do more and spend more? Yes, labour do more and spend more? Yes, we need a Labour do more and spend more? Yes, we need a retraining programme and targeted, specific support for those sectors, because frankly there is a of not doing this. There is a cost at the end of this anyway. Yes, and that is why we have already borrowed a significant amount, because this pandemic is significant and we have to match the scale of action with the scale of the challenge and acknowledge that, as well as saving lives, we have to save livelihoods. Peter, you won a change of pubs, upmarket pubs and restaurants. —— upmarket pubs and restaurants. -- you mn. Do you upmarket pubs and restaurants. —— you run. Do you think this goes far you mn. Do you think this goes far enough? will it you run. Do you think this goes far enough? Will it help you? Our business is doing well, and what the Chancellor has done this year has been very positive for my entire industry and certainly very good for Oakman Inns, my business. However, I would urge the Chancellor to look again at some detail and look at sectors on a granular basis. To pick “P sectors on a granular basis. To pick up one example, because there are several parts of the hospitality industry which will continue to stmggle. If industry which will continue to struggle. If you take nightclubs, stmggle. If you take nightclubs, so... They struggle. If you take nightclubs, so... They have been shut throughout. They are not allowed to open. Been preparing to open. open. Been preparing to open. I spoke to the chief executive of a professional nightclub company today and he has been preparing to open, investing in capital, he has kept his team on, he has brought people his team on, he has brought peopla off furlough to his team on, he has brought people off furlough to prepare the marketing and make sure everything is Covid secure. So this is no use to him. None at all. But I hope the government will be looking further. They have had to do a lot in a short period of time, but if a business is not allowed to open, it’s surely still a viable business afterwards, still a viabla business afterwards, when it still a viable business afterwards, when it can open, so still a viable business afterwards, when it can open, sol still a viable business afterwards, when it can open, so I think you when it ran open, so I think you have to when it can open, so I think you have to separate a business which is never going to succeed again, but Peter Marks’s never going to succeed again, but Peter Marks’s customers are ready to come back, they want to come back. If the government, for public health reasons, will not allow nightclubs to open, I guess it can get to understand that, but there must be support so these businesses are still there to reopen, and they are a big part of the economy, in due course. You could also talk about theatres and life events, all sorts of companies, industries, rather. Catherine, you have your hand up. I’d like to agree with what the gentleman has just said about the government may be needing to look at the industries in a more granular lavel. My the industries in a more granular level. My company is a company which lavel. My company is a company which provides a day level. My company is a company which provides a day service for adults over 50 with disabilities, and my company is closed at the moment and the clients that we have are not offered any provision and haven’t been offered any provision since the lockdown started. It’s my company —— lockdown started. It’s my company -- is my company not lockdown started. It’s my company —— is my company not viable and, if so, is my company not viabla and, if so, what happens to is my company not viable and, if so, what happens to these people in the long term? These people now are suffering from, in many cases, being suffering from, in many rases, being isolated. They suffering from, in many cases, being isolated. They don’t always have family or friends that can keep in family or friends that ran keep in touch family or friends that can keep in touch with them, and the day centre was a bit of a lifeline for them, so what happens to them in future? I wanted to reiterate those two points. points. It’s such an ambiguous thing, and this is the whole point thing, and this is the whola point of what thing, and this is the whole point of what we talk about in dialogue with the public, when you say viable with the public, when you say viabla job, what they with the public, when you say viable job, what they mean? job, what they mean? I think there is a big problem here, that there is going to be a whole generation of going to be a whola generation of peopla that going to be a whole generation of people that are going to be thrown peopla that are going to be thrown onto the pila people that are going to be thrown onto the pile of trash by missing onto the pila of trash by missing out on onto the pile of trash by missing out on the scheme, and it’s going to really, really damage the economy, it’s going to damage the country’s it’s going to damage the countrrs future it’s going to damage the country’s future prospects, we are going to be losing all of those future tax revenues that we need to actually start to grow the economy again in another six or 12 months or a couple of years down the line. We are going to need all of these creative industries and the nightclub industry and the social industries that actually drive our UK economy, a consumer led economy. We need to PWP “P a consumer led economy. We need to prop up these industries, because that will prop up the long—term that will prop up the long-term recovery of that will prop up the long—term recovery of the economy in the future. What do you say, Alok future. what do you say, Alok Sharma? future. What do you say, Alok Sharma? We have had three people from the audience, and Rishi Sunak made it quite clear this support was for peopla made it quite clear this support was for people with the viable jobs, but for peopla with the viabla jobs, but jobs that are for people with the viable jobs, but jobs that are not viable now, like jobs that are not viabla now, like theatres jobs that are not viable now, like theatres and nightclubs, will become viabla again theatres and nightclubs, will become viable again we are through this? I viabla again we are through this? I spend viable again we are through this? I spend every day talking to businesses, business organisations, and I know it’s very difficult for lots of sectors will stop we do understand that. I think what we have seen from the Chancellor today is a set of measures which have been very welcomed by business, and the CBI describing them as a decisive set of measures. If you look at those individual measures, yes, they are there to support people coming are there to support peopla coming back into are there to support people coming back into work, but they are also an extension of the loan schemes in terms of the time limits on those, in terms of how long people have to in terms of how long peopla have to pay back the in terms of how long people have to pay back the loans they have taken. We talk about individual sectors, we had this discussion earlier, there had this discussion eartier, there has been had this discussion earlier, there has been targeted support. If you look at the hospitality and leisure look at the hospitality and loisure sector, look at the hospitality and leisure sector, they have a one year holiday when it comes to rates. That is continuing. The Chancellor has announced a set of measures in terms of allowing people longer to pay of allowing peopla longer to pay their of allowing people longer to pay their VAT deferrals. There are a whole range of things, and this whola range of things, and this builds whole range of things, and this builds on the almost £200 billion of support where we have helped 12 million people stay in work. What million peopla stay in work. what about million people stay in work. What about the point made by the audience that the jobs that cannot exist, even on a part—time basis at the even on a part-time basis at the moment, even on a part—time basis at the moment, because of restrictions we are in, which the government has imposed on us, those are in, which the government has imposed on us, thosejobs are not imposed on us, those jobs are not viabla now imposed on us, thosejobs are not viable now but they will come back. viabla now but they will come back. So will viable now but they will come back. So will those people be thrown on So will those peopla be thrown on the So will those people be thrown on the scrapheap? That is not obviously the intention at all. But is that not the outcome? Support is available for those, and the furlough scheme is continuing until the end of October. But after that. In the creative industries, there is a £1.5 In the creative industries, there is 3 £1.5 million In the creative industries, there is a £1.5 million package put forward after that, 3 £1.5 million package put forward afterthat, but a £1.5 million package put forward after that, but the other point is, and Louise talked about traineeships, if you look at what the Chancellor announced in his summer statement, there was £30 summer statement, there was 50 billion of summer statement, there was £30 billion of support for green jobs, support for traineeships, support for young people through the kick—start scheme, support for apprenticeships. There is a lot we are doing, one, to support people are doing, one, to support peopla who are in are doing, one, to support people who are in work now, so they can who are in work now, so they ran come back, who are in work now, so they can come back, even for a small percentage of time, but then also ensuring that we are supporting the creation of new ensuring that we are supporting the creation of newjobs and helping creation of new jobs and helping peopla to creation of newjobs and helping people to get retrained. May I make a point about the bank debt? So, I spoke to another industry colleague today and he had agreed a CBil which enabled him to keep on funding his business, without the help of furlough, long enough for when the restrictions are lifted, he could reopen, but of course it was right at the last stage, and the bank told him today, because of the new government restrictions, we don’t think this is a good bet any more, you won’t be getting it. So he is completely stranded now. And not sure what to do next, so, again, I don’t want to be overly critical, Alok, I’m just asking you to go back and look at some specific detail, for notjust my sector, but for similarly affected sectors. There is a difference between a business that is not viable, because customers don’t want to use it and one that is not allowed to operate, or there are laws restricting its operation in such a way, that it is not economic to operate. If I mayjust come back on the point, the start of that process, I, the Chancellor and others... Everyone who is not familiar with that acronym, CBils... It is the coronavirus business interruption and loan scheme, it is one of the loan schemes we have introduced and over a million businesses have been supported through the bounce back loans and other schemes as well. What we have been very keen on, is to continue to impress upon the banks, they need to support businesses and I was being very clear in the House, in terms of press conferences that took place at Downing Street, that this is a time for the banks to step up and support and there is an underwritten guarantee from the government as well, when it comes, up to 80%. I cannot comment on individual cases, but the fact that we have seen over a million businesses now supported through loan schemes suggests that it is working. I understand, there will be people that fall through the gaps. Iqbal. Hi there. I was just thinking about the term viable business. A friend of mine is self—employed, he is basically a one—man limited company, he was not eligible for any help in their furlough scheme, so he is living off his savings for about six months. Rishi’s new scheme is also not going to give him anything, so again he has got to keep relying upon his savings. Itjust seems very unfair that because he is deemed a non—viable business, that even though he is not claiming benefits and he has always been employed, that he could end up losing his business and having to have a complete rethink of what he does when all this has happened and yet, in the past, self—employed companies have been able to take grants, even if their own business was booming at the time. Who decides what is viable? Well, if we talk about the self employment scheme... Briefly, because I have everybody else here as well. Of course, I am sorry. No, no, no, is Rishi Sunak deciding what is a viable business? Are you deciding? I think, just going back to the point about the self employment scheme, of course there is additional support that the Chancellor announced today. Who is deciding what is a viable business? Ultimately, it is where businesses are bringing people back to work and they are spending at least a third of their time in employment and the scheme will work on the basis that you are in work, being paid by your employer for at least a third of the time and then the rest of the wage bill is effectively shared between you, the employer and the government. It is whether the company believes it is worth the investment. Richard. Thanks, Fiona. A question for both Alok and Louise, since they have both mentioned retraining. How is that supposed to happen in a socially distanced environment, before people get back to some sort of normality? I can imagine apprenticeship schemes and things like that are going to rely more on practical hands—on face—to—face contact and communication, rather than being able to do stuff virtually. So, it is a question on how training can operate and apprenticeships can operate in this current environment. Because we haven’t yet heard from the rest of the panel, I am going to keep going round, Richard, if you forgive me. Ed. Thanks, Fiona. I have been talking to a lot of businesses, a lot of people over the last few weeks and months and I have never seen the level of anxiety that we have got. People are really worried that their businesses are going to fold, that they are going to lose theirjobs and while, like Louise, I welcome some of the packages today, I just don’t think it goes anywhere near far enough. Take the example that Iqbal mentioned, there are a lot of self—employed people who got nothing in the previous support package. Over a million people who are excluded, they are not covered today. So what would you do differently? Well, you should bring them into the self employment scheme that was there and it should be more generous. Talking about Peter, he is quite right, there are a number of sectors, I would include nurseries, I would include tourism, sectors that are just not able to operate and they are viable businesses and it is just not good enough for the Secretary of State to say they are going to forget them, because why should these businesses, why should these people lose theirjobs, lose their businesses, because of the random impact of a virus? We have got to build back. I can see no long—term strategy for the government. They made a mistake as well. They thought that Covid would be over by now and they introduce something called thejob retention bonus, £9 billion, which is going to be paid out at the end of this year. They could have chosen to use that money, instead of this game that they thought would be useful, but put it back into the scheme today. They could have therefore been far more generous, include the people I’m talking about, who have been excluded, not got the help they need, and it could have run for a lot longer. That is what we have seen in places like Germany, and France and Austria, countries who are really getting behind their businesses and helping them through real distress and I’m afraid the government really has failed. Devi. Yeah, I do wonder if we are looking at the problem the wrong way, because the idea has been that you have your economic issues here, you have your public health problem there and they are in opposition to each other, but if we look at GDP performance, for the second quarter of 2020, what you notice is the countries that control the virus quite tightly, Taiwan, South Korea, even you know, Finland, Norway, there GDP has been minimal, less than 5%. Taiwan is practically the same economically in the countries that didn’t control the virus, like the United States, the UK, Spain, are taking upwards of 20%, as well as, you know, thousands of deaths, in the States, hundreds of thousands of deaths. The question in my mind is, we are entering this level of restrictions, would it not be better instead to actually follow East Asia, follow the model of strong suppression, possibly elimination, and you get rid of your virus, you have a full domestic recovery, and then you can get back to actually business recovering fully. What I’m hearing from senior economists, who I work with, that unless you solve your public health problem, you’re not going to your economic problems and we still have a substantial public health problem and economic problem currently. I think that is exactly right. One of the real problems we have had with this government is that they have acted too slowly, they have been inefficient, they have said they are going to have an trace and isolation strategy, just the way that other countries have had, working with local government, they have just not done that. That has created the problems for businesses and why we are in the mess that we are. We have got Alok, forgive me, we have got a question on that, so I am just going to move this on. Iqbal. What is your question? Hi there. Are the new measures a short step away from full lockdown again, as this is what happened the first time around, with more and more restrictions happening almost every day? Peter, I am going to come to you on that. You were at the sharp end in terms of the effect that restrictions would have and if a full lockdown is just around the corner. Well, we were relieved that this bizarre kind of circuit breaker idea kind of went away. You thought it was bizarre? Yeah. I think, you know, the approach, you have to deal with public health, there is no doubt about that and, you know, no one should think the business would ever put profits before people’s safety, because it is just not true. And certainly not in my industry. You know, we have been quite frustrated that the government has felt the need to impose traditional lockdowns and I would like to refer back to the shenanigans last week from Matt Hancock,... Shenanigans! Shenanigans. I mean, he came on to the radio four today programme, it was about 815 last Friday and tried to imply that the major cause for the increase in transmissions was the hospitality industry. I mean, it is just totally untrue. Very, very misleading. You know, we opened onJuly the 4th, you know, eight or nine weeks went by, there has been no significant change in the number of transmissions. Then, at the beginning of September, there is a big change, how on earth could that be blamed on the hospitality industry? We are very angry. We want a retraction and an apology and if we don’t get one, this issue will not go away. People are really, really hurt and upset. We sweated blood to get ready to reopen our businesses. We worked really hard to make our premises Covid secure from day one. Now, I have served one and a half million people since we have opened, not one has got Covid. The government’s figures, Public Health England figures, made it very clear that week 37, which was the week before we spoke, number one, Arena for transmissions, kept in their before we spoke, number one, Arena for transmissions, care homes, numbertwo, educational settings, number three, workplaces. They said they don’t believe it is happening in the workplace. It is in hospitality. And then they sent out Dominic Raab the other day and when he was pressed he kind of said, well we think it is kind of asymptomatic, so we think it is actually happening, even though our own figures say it is not. I mean, poor Dominic, it is not his fault, you know, they sent him out to kind of face us. Just to be clear, so the Public Health England figures, as you suggest, to the week of the 13th of September, suggest a 508 confirmed outbreaks, 5% were in food outlets, including restaurants and pubs. Can Ijust ask you, what do you make of the ten o’clock curfew? Good idea, bad idea? I think it is a poor idea, but not from a business perspective. I’m not too worried. In the sense of, my particular business, it is not going to really be impacted that much. It is just a bit absurd. I have a vicar that comes to one of our places for supper, Evensong, every week, he sort of sits down about ten to nine, he has something to eat. Now, as I understand it, if the vicar hasn’t finished his chocolate souffle at ten o’clock, I am going to have I am going to have to frogmarch him out of the premises. I mean, it isjust heavy—handed and silly. Hang on a minute, no one is suggesting... In fairness, that you would have to frogmarched him out. Just make it clear at ten o’clock he would have to go. But really, now, the problem here is if everyone walks out at ten o’clock, that is quite dangerous. What you want is a kind of gradual dispersal of people, so I would encourage the government to look again at the detail. I don’t agree with the curfew, but if there is going to be one, let’s do it in a sensible fashion. We refer to Belgium, that is the Antwerp model, that was an 1130 curfew and actually at 1130 you had to stop serving drinks and you had time to drink up and leave in a civilised fashion, so it is a poor idea. Yeah? And I think they need to look at it again. Devi let us just come back to the question specifically, are the new measures a short step away from a full lockdown again, with more and more restrictions happening almost every few days, because you are speaking to us from Edinburgh, and you have different restrictions up there and I am thinking particularly in terms of household mixing. Yes, the idea was to move early, to move aggressively and to get a check on it and we are not even sure these measures will be enough yet to really take handle, especially as we have had universities returning and a number of outbreaks in students. I guess the larger point I would make is that we are not going back to 2019, there is no normal anywhere across the world. Every country is living under different kinds of restrictions and in a way, we need to move away from the lockdown language and get into degree of restrictions. Every country is making a choice. If you look at East Asia and the Pacific, those countries have said, we want to get back to normal, live music, full sports stadiums, you know, concerts, all the things you can have, if you eliminate the virus and you have strong border checks. They accept the trade off, they cannot travel abroad. And you look at Europe and you’re seen these night—time curfews, indoor hospitality shot, basically going after riskier settings, assuming the virus is circulating and you’re trying to stop super spreading events. That means you cannot have this kind of events, because too many people become infected. I guess, we need to have a functional testing, tracing and isolating scheme and the latest figures show it is truly a broken system currently, so in a way, there is no other way to suppress the virus apart from keeping people away from each other, and the longer the government delays in trying to get that system up and running, the more likely we are to end up in another lockdown. Because if you just let the virus run its course, like what has happened in Israel, the first developed country to go back into national lockdown, the problem is that your hospital start filling up, the ICUs start filling up and at .6 case the talent he rate starts creeping up over one or 2%, people arrive to hospital and cannot get oxygen, cannot get treatment, cannot get ventilators, and so governments are kind of forced into a national lockdown to help the health care capacity need and that means other services like cancer treatments, surgeries, they get backlogged, and we end up in a repeat of March and that is what we are trying to avoid, by keeping the virus at low levels, right now, before we get into that really difficult position. 0K, we have got some hands up. Neil. Thanks. Just to go back to Ed’s point, the benefit of hindsight there. I think the government are doing quite well. I also do not share the pessimistic views of business at the moment. I mean, the construction industry, we are attempting to build our way out of this crisis and I think doing very well. I have employed people recently, the construction industry is seeing growth, there are sectors of it that are closing down, but there is also a lot of sectors opening and also, Devi, Ithink the ifs and buts in relation to your last statement don’t quite follow through. We are not in the same position that we were at the beginning of the year. People are wearing masks, most business settings, mine in particular, are Covid friendly or Covid safe and I think lots of people are taking the restrictions very seriously, so I don’t see us falling back into the element of doom and gloom that seems to be profiting through. Alex. With any new measures, will the government be proactive or reactive in their response? You could argue previously, like in March, the government was quite reactive, they have been quite slow and their response to Corona and I look, as a student, as Devi was saying, students they can go to the pubs any more, they are locked into their accommodation and I don’t want that to happen to me. I would rather the government to be upfront and honest, say what could happen and put the measures in place before it gets worse, not when it gets worse or after it has happened. So, Alok, are unlikely to see more restrictions? Well, nobody, Fiona, wants to go into a full lockdown. That is absolutely clear. What we have done... Do you think it is likely that more is coming down the line? Well, what we have always said is that we will continue to monitor this on a daily basis and obviously, if we need to act, we will, but I think the fundamental point here is that the vast majority of people have indeed followed the rules and actually businesses have secured their premises and I have worked with trade unions, I have worked with businesses, to make sure that we have got the right guidance out there. This is something the Prime Minister, Matt Hancock, yourself, have said repeatedly over the last few days and those people are following the rules and a recent academic study found that between May and August, only 18% of people self isolated after developing symptoms and 11% were self isolating after being told they had been in contact with a confirmed case. Back in April, it was 50%, it was not great then either. What makes you so sure that people are following the rules 7 You talk about Test and Trace, there are almost half a million people now who, through that system, have self isolated, who would otherwise have been putting others at risk. How can you be sure... I am just looking at those figures, how can you be sure they are actually self isolating? Well, Ithink, you know, they are obviously contacted... I know, that is very different. I understand that, but I think there is a process to make sure that that happens. Are they being checked up on? Let me give you an example, when you are talking about people not necessarily following the rules, I mean I come into London every day by train and I have actually seen now over the past few months people are, by and large, just about everyone, is observing the rule to have face coverings on on public transport. Despite those figures, are you confident that people who are being told to self—isolate are self isolating, in large numbers? As I said to you, I think if you look at Test and Trace, a significant percentage of people who have been contacted as a result of somebody else getting the infection are indeed self isolating, . . . Where is the evidence of that? Louise is asking you where the evidences? There is a fundamental point here also about the position that we are in and I think Neil made a really good point. We know a lot more about this virus, we have got a whole set of measures that are in place and nobody wants to go into full lockdown, but what we need is people to continue to observe the rules and the guidelines and I do think the vast majority are. Louise. I mean the latest restrictions and more advanced lockdown measures are evidence of only one thing, that the virus is going in the wrong direction and this is a very grave moment for the country. We have had 31,000 cases over the last six days and hospitalisations and the death toll rising again and I think peopla are right to ask whether we are back in the same position as we were earlier this year, with the government failing to prepare for a second lockdown. The Track and Trace system is not world heating, it is very far from it, less than 80% of contacts are reliably not been reached every week. The new figures out today show that 10% of tests are being returned within 2A hours and Track and Trace... That really is incorrect. That is the ONS statistics out today. From all testing roots, 10%, 10.6% have come back within 2A hours. The Track and Trace system has been outsourced to companies like Serco, Deloitte, GAS, none of which had any experience in track and tracing and that is why so few are being reached and even fewer are actually been followed up to make sure they self—isolate. And all of this means that the backbone of the public health response is not there, so we cannot ensure the wider reopening of the economy unless it is there as well. We have lost sight of the virus. And do you think, just coming back to the question that we are just a short step away from a full lockdown? Well, until we have that effective public health response underpinning any restrictions, whether that is the Track and Trace system was the consequence of testing, it was utterly inevitable that as schools, universities and workers returned, that testing demand would increase, but the government have not increased testing capacity since the end ofJune. Mark, you have got your hand up. I just want to roll back to a point that Peter made about the hospitality and entertainment industry needing to open and then Devi made a point about South East Asia, they made a trade off and by closing their borders and accepting that they couldn’t travel, they were able to open up hospitality and entertainment. So, if we did that, how would the holiday industry and the travel industry react? You’re not going to please everyone all of the time, are you? Tia. So, I would just like to go back to what was said about people being checked up on when they come home and are asked to self—isolate or self—isolate for other reasons. So, I got back from France quite recently, had to fill in a passenger locator form and was told I could be checked up on. I wasn’t, once. And I know a few other people who have come back from France as well, or from other holidays, who have not been checked up on and I was self—isolating in London and I noticed when I came out of self—isolation that people in the shops weren’t particularly wearing masks, even people working in the shops and the same on public transport. Quite a lot of people were, but also quite a few were not and I just feel like if we do not put anyone in a position, even just a shop door entrance, saying, would you mind putting a mask on, something like that, it does encourage people to do so and if no one is checked up on, it is all very nice that people have to understand that they need to do it, but if no one feels like there are going to be any repercussions, why would they, and I think that is why there are so many people not doing it. Let mejust... I am sorry, Tia, I interrupted you, do go on. I was just going to say, I think it is difficult to expect people to do it if they do not think that there are going to be any repercussions from it and, yeah, I think it needs a bit of encouragement and it is really important and you are less likely to do it if you feel like other people aren’t and therefore you are not protected. Let us just be really clear and specific on this point that Tia raises, people who are told to self—isolate, how do you know that they are doing it? Well, there is a follow—up process that takes place, we have people who are doing that. No, don’t move on to something else, how many people are followed up? Tia wasn’t. As I said you, there are half a million people who have been self—isolating through the Test and Trace system. And how do you know how many of them actually are self isolating? Well, as I said... How many actually are? There is a follow—up process which obviously takes place. So, does the government know how many are actually doing the self—isolating? Well, Fiona, half a million people, almost half a million people now through the test and trace system have been self isolating. They have been asked to, but how do you know they actually are? I want to go back to this point about test and tracing. If I may, because Louise raised this point about testing not increasing, actually capacity has gone up significantly. We are almost at 260,000 testing capacity right now, so the idea... It was supposed to be 350,000 at the end ofJune. It has not increased since the end of June. The capacity has indeed gone up and if you look... As we have talked up many times in this programme, capacity is very different to the number of people actually being tested. Ed. Fiona, I think people will be extremely worried at the moment, they are worried that there could be a second lockdown, they are worried that the government strategy on testing, tracing and isolation just is not working and it is true, Alok, we have seen the testing, how that has been sending people to other parts of the country, but on the isolation point that you make, Fiona, that Tia made, people are not being checked up on and the report that you quoted, you have got to ask why people are not isolating when they have been asked to. First of all, they are not being checked up on, secondly people who are desperate to go to work, they are not giving any support payments to stay at home. In Germany, they are. They are encouraged, their financial losses being recompensed. Let me finish. You have got no real strategy on that, nothing like the Germans have got. The Germans have been far more successful and there is another issue that we have got to remember, I think the public lost a lot of trust in the government earlier in this pandemic, when Dominic Cummings broke the lockdown rules and paid no price for that. That sent a really bad message and if you are surprised that people out there aren’t following all the rules, Alok, I think you need to talk to your Prime Minister and say, why did he not pull up Dominic Cummings? There can’t be one rule for us and one rule for Boris Johnson’s friends. Sherry, you have had your hand up a long time. Just with regards to the increasing restrictions, it seems to be every few days, more and more restrictions that are coming in, I think a lot of confidence in the government’s long term strategy has been lost, because red lines have not been laid out. Everybody senses we are going in the direction of a second lockdown, but with the recent push towards moving peopla to go back to the office to work, which has now been reversed, people are now being encouraged to work from home, there is very little confidence that despite the government saying we will endeavour to keep schools open, that is our priority, I, as a parent of a school age child, have no confidence that that is going to pan out. How can we see an evidence—based approach on the government’s policies? In terms of restrictions, moving on and developing every few days, as you mention, let us take a question on exactly that from Linda. Hi, good evening. My question is regarding Christmas. Christmas seems to be cancelled, doesn’t it, Linda, were not quite sure what is happening with Christmas. Go on. Well, Christmas lunch in a pub, on tables of six, in separate names, in order to be able to see my children and grandchildren altogether. That is probably, hopefully, the next time we can all be together, as a family. Is Christmas off! Ed? Well, I really hope it isn’t. It is so important for families to come together, but we are only going to save Christmas if the government get their act together. We have been asking, the Labour Party have been asking, the opposition parties have been asking them, to sort out test trace and isolate. I am sorry to come back to that, but it has failed for many reasons. Let me give you another reason, in many other countries like Korea, like Taiwan, like Germany, the government has trusted the local authority, the councils, the local public health officials and worked with them, they have been part of a team. In this government, it has been all centralised, Whitehall run. Sometimes local councils haven’t been given any information until the last minute, that is just not acceptable and if you talk to officials and public health, they are pretty cross, because this was a basic tenet of public health policy in a pandemic, that you should have a team approach, a locally—based approach, and if you did contact tracing locally, properly, rather than through a central core system with all your private contractors who are getting all these nice juicy contracts, I tell you what, it would workjust like it is working well in other countries. This is the rule of six and you are This is the mic of six and you are doing things a This is the rule of six and you are doing things a bit differently in Scotland, it’s the rule of six by different households cannot meet, different households rannot meet, which different households cannot meet, which would create problems for which would create problams for Linda if which would create problems for Linda if that comes to England. What Linda if that comes to England. what is it that you Linda if that comes to England. What is it that you know or you think you know in Scotland that means that different households shouldn’t meet, which isn’t known or is being done differently in England? I think the scientific advice is pretty similar across the nations and many countries across the world, and these are political decisions and trade—offs of what you are going to trade-offs of what you are going to emphasise trade—offs of what you are going to emphasise and how you manage the infection. why emphasise and how you manage the infection. Why do you think Scotland infection. why do you think Scotland has infection. Why do you think Scotland has taken that approach? The tracing system is quite robust here and they found that many of the clusters were coming from households, indoor homes, house parties has been a big problem, so we are trying to break those chains of transmission. These kind of restrictions were put into the west of Scotland 3 kind of restrictions were put into the west of Scotland a few weeks back and they managed to change the hack and they managed to change the exponential back and they managed to change the exponential into linear growth, so getting a handle on that, and getting a handla on that, and hopefully getting a handle on that, and hopefully that can do the same for hopefully that ran do the same for the rest hopefully that can do the same for the rest of the country. I think the thing that brings all of these together is the test, track and trace. The thing which has been most seen in the news over the last couple of weeks has been how much of a shambles the testing system is in. People can’t get a test and, when you can’t get a test, you can’t tell how many people in the country are how many peopla in the country are getting how many people in the country are getting the virus. When we can’t getting the vims. when we can’t tell who getting the virus. When we can’t tell who those people are, they tell who those peopla are, they can’t tell who those people are, they can’t tell them to isolate. You then can’t track their known contacts, ran’t track their known contacts, and the can’t track their known contacts, and the virus is then out of control again. So and the virus is then out of control again. Sol and the virus is then out of control again. So I think we need to start to fix the testing system so that we ran track to fix the testing system so that we can track thereafter and trace thereafter. It’s really important. If we don’t fix the testing system at the moment, then I fear that we are going to face a second lockdown and Christmas is going to be cancelled, and I really hope that both of those things aren’t true, but my fear is they are. Peter, you didn’t wait for the England and Walas app, didn’t wait for the England and Wales app, which was launched today, Walas app, which was hunched today, and it was Wales app, which was launched today, and it was much earlier in Northern and it was much eartier in Northern Ireland and it was much earlier in Northern Ireland and Scotland. You go ahead and did your own app. We did that because we wanted to be Covid safe and enable people to order food and and enabla peopla to order food and drink on and enable people to order food and drink on our and enable people to order food and drink on ourapp. and enable people to order food and drink on our app. We quickly realised that was the way to solve the contact tracing. So we were able to do it so every time a customer comes in, once they have registered on our app, we know they are there, so that, if we were to be contacted by the government and say, look, so was in your pub, we could work out who they might have had any form of contact with. Did you just give up on the government, in terms of the tracing app? It was a bit confusing, and I think it was in May, it was confirmed it was coming out the following week, and we are for micro months on! Hell of a big gap, we had a responsibility to report our customers, and it was the easiest “Y customers, and it was the easiest way of doing it. People who didn’t have telephones, we took it manually on a pad, so we have always compliant Day complied. We help the government before the regulations. I do think people should support the government with these rules in every government with these mles in every “Y government with these mles in every way they ran. government with these rules in every way they can. Are you worried about way they ran. Are you worried about the effect way they can. Are you worried about the effect on Christmas, in terms of bookings? Well, yes, but the effect on Christmas, in terms of bookings? Well, yes, butl the effect on Christmas, in terms of bookings? Well, yes, but I think there is a wider tragedy. Everybody uses the emotive term of Christmas being cancelled, and clearly it being cancelled, and dearty it isn’t, it’s just being cancelled, and clearly it isn’t, it’sjust going being cancelled, and clearly it isn’t, it’s just going to being cancelled, and clearly it isn’t, it’sjust going to be different. I don’t think it will be possibla for different. I don’t think it will be possible for the government to allow large office parties and stuff, so we’ll just large office parties and stuff, so we’lljust have large office parties and stuff, so we’ll just have to large office parties and stuff, so we’lljust have to suck that up. But we’ll just have to suck that up. But I think it we’lljust have to suck that up. But I think it would be a we’lljust have to suck that up. But I think it would be areal we’lljust have to suck that up. But I think it would be a real shame if families can’t get together at Christmas time, so let’s hope that the measures being put in place will work, and perhaps some more detailed work, and perhaps some more detailad [oral action, work, and perhaps some more detailed localaction, because work, and perhaps some more detailed local action, because I think what [oral action, because I think what is needed, local action, because I think what is needed, rather than this centralised command and control, same for all four parts of the country, just to look at the detail. If you compare the Treasury, with this great execution of everything that they do, and on the health side not so good they are failing to execute, they need to get on top of it. Louise. Linda, you have a much bigger family it. Louise. Linda, you have a much biggerfamily than mine, and I think bigger family than mine, and I think I could fit my biggerfamily than mine, and I think I could fit my whole family and my I could fit my whola family and my mates on I could fit my whole family and my mates on one table of six! mates on one table of six! Really! Not so much the family but the mates! I don’t want to sound like a broken record, but it really is getting test, trace and isolate fixed. This isn’t with the benefit of hindsight. The World Health Organisation was clear back in March, as we were watching the virus come from China to Italy and this country, that that system was necessary as a backbone in our pub“: necessary as a backbone in our public health response, and the government stopped tracking and tracing back in April. It didn’t run tracing back in April. It didn’t mn proper testing, tracing back in April. It didn’t run propertesting, didn’t tracing back in April. It didn’t run proper testing, didn’t ramp up testing capacity to where it needs to be. I think the public are incredibly sympathetic and I understand this is very difficult but, actually, it is pretty simple to is needed to be done, and it’s unforgivable that the government is where it is. The virus is an act of God, but the incompetence and failure to address it, they lie squarely with the government. Can squarely with the government. (“an come up lots squarely with the government. Can come up lots of hand up. Alan. What come up lots of hand up. Alan. what measures come up lots of hand up. Alan. What measures will be taken if Christmas is cancelled, the effect of mental health in the country will be very hard, especially for older people, hard, especially for older peopla, and hard, especially for older people, and the worry I have is that this is just going to build on top of all the worries they have for everything else that’s happening. Peggy. There have been other references to other parts of the world, especially Asia, and I was in Southeast Asia in january for a and I was in Southeast Asia in January for a holiday and, since january for a holiday and, since returning, I January for a holiday and, since returning, I have been following my lockdown here through Zoom and the telephone, and I have been observing bears, and they went through a harder lockdown, and now they are mainly recovered and getting about their own lives. A good question about hospitality, because there are restrictions about people travelling restrictions about peopla travelling abroad, restrictions about people travelling abroad, and lots of hotels are now fully booked from local people fully booked from [oral peopla travelling, fully booked from local people travelling, trying to make the most in the country itself, so I fully echo what Devi is saying, that there is no conflict in balancing public is no conﬂict in balancing public health is no conflict in balancing public health and the economy. Elliott. It was just to add to some of the points that Kieran made about the failures of testing. I think a large part of the failure is with the privatisation of testing. We talk about NHS testing but, in many uses, about NHS testing but, in many cases, it isn’t the NHS who are rases, it isn’t the NHS who are testing. A cases, it isn’t the NHS who are testing. A family friend had to pay £175 to get a test and they did have coronavirus. If they were not in a position to pay, that would have been somebody who would not have been able to get access to a test otherwise it would have been going out in society unaware they had coronavirus. So out in society unaware they had coronavirus. Sojust out in society unaware they had coronavirus. So just adding to that and mentioning the impact of privatisation on testing as well. No government wants to be cast in the government wants to be fast in the role of government wants to be cast in the role of the Grinch, obviously, and rola of the Grinch, obviously, and Boris johnson role of the Grinch, obviously, and BorisJohnson said he very much Boris johnson said he very much hopes things BorisJohnson said he very much hopes things could get, that we can hopes things could get, that we ran get together hopes things could get, that we can get together at Christmas, but he can’t promise. When you listen to can’t promise. when you listen to Linda, who can’t promise. When you listen to Linda, who obviously has a massive family, congratulations, but the idea of getting altogether at the moment, if the will of six continues, is a nonstarter. I moment, if the will of six continues, is a nonstarter. Iwould like [cad continues, is a nonstarter. Iwould like lead and all of us to enjoy time with our like lead and all of us to enjoy time with ourfamilies like lead and all of us to enjoy time with our families at Christmas, but let’s go back to where we are now compared to March. We are in a quite different place because of the action is the government has taken, and because lots of people have and because lots of peopla have shown and because lots of people have shown an enormous amount of common sense. We have managed the months to get this under control and to open “P get this under control and to open up the economy in a big way. You have seen in the last few months the economy started to recover, consumer confidence returning. Is do you think coronavirus is under control in this think coronavims is under control in this country? think coronavirus is under control in this country? Cross infection rates have been rising so we have introduced new measures that people to follow them. What I am concerned to follow them. what I am concerned about is to follow them. What I am concerned about is when I hear from to follow them. What I am concerned about is when I hearfrom Louise to follow them. What I am concerned about is when I hear from Louise and Ed this constant criticism. Of course, we should be held to account and we should get things right, but when Louise’s colleague, the Shadow Education Secretary, talked about the fact that Labour shouldn’t miss the fact that labour shouldn’t miss out on a good the fact that Labour shouldn’t miss out on a good crisis, that is really quite unacceptable. This is a global pandemic and we all need to work together, we want to see constructive opposition, not people constructive opposition, not peopla just carping constructive opposition, not people just carping from the sidelines. That isn’t what the public wants. I think that is really unfair on the labour Party think that is really unfair on the Labour Party and the opposition labour Party and the opposition first up we Labour Party and the opposition first up we have been supportive of the government on many measures. It is our the government on many measures. It is ourjob to hold you to account when you make mistakes and everybody knows you are making a real mistake in the test entries. The facts are there for the Alan’s point about elderty there for the Alan’s point about elderly people may be suffering from elderty peopla may be suffering from mental elderly people may be suffering from mental health. If you look at our rare homes, mental health. If you look at our care homes, there are a lot of rare homes, there are a lot of people with care homes, there are a lot of people with dementia who, because rare people with dementia who, because care homes haven’t had the testing rare homes haven’t had the testing for their care homes haven’t had the testing for their staff and residents and visitors, some of those elderly visitors, some of those elderty peopla, visitors, some of those elderly people, their conditions have worsened. This is the impact of not getting testing right, it is affecting many people. ﬂ I want to get a question from Alex Buckmaster. Why can I return from a foreign holiday, quarantine and see my family at Christmas, but not from university? I’m going to come to Devi, events have happened in Scotland today, hundreds, over have happened in Scotland today, hundreds, over1000 have happened in Scotland today, hundreds, over 1000 at least student self isolating in universities in Scotland and also some in Liverpool and possibly elsewhere by now and what we are hearing is that because of the rules in Scotland, different households not mixing, students at universities in Scotland cannot go home. They may not go home for Christmas. What is going on? I can Christmas. what is going on? I ran only speak Christmas. What is going on? I can only speakfrom Christmas. What is going on? I can only speak from the perspective of pub“: only speak from the perspective of public health which is we have seen this scenario in the United States over the past eight weeks, a lot of students came back, movement of peopla across students came back, movement of people across the country and the peopla across the country and the world people across the country and the world into cramped student living, which is hard to keep separate with shared bathrooms and kitchens and adding on top of that, you have students who want to socialise and they are least likely to comply with mles they are least likely to comply with rules which they feel are restrictive on them. Let me ask you as a global public health expert, given how quickly this has happened, Scottish universities have been back for a fortnight, do you think they should have come back at all? I think they should have only come back under strict guidelines, I did in Article eight weeks ago where I asked for testing on arrival and after five days to catch all cases, regular testing on campuses and ventilation and bubbling and all the different measures you would have in place to make the campus Covid safe and it just place to make the campus Covid safe and itjust seems and all I guess I and it just seems and all I guess I ran do as and itjust seems and all I guess I can do as an the Adamic is lay but I ran do as an the Adamic is lay but I think will help can do as an the Adamic is lay but I think will help them to go back safely. We have got some students amongst our audience. Let us hear from Sinem. You are starting your first year. I would just like to say, first year. I would just like to 5“- young first year. I would just like to say, young people like myself, are say, young peopla like myself, are being say, young people like myself, are being blamed for this second spike in Covid—19 and hearing for example in Covid-19 and hearing for example Matt in Covid—19 and hearing for example Matt Hancock making a condescending comment on, do not kill your grandma by matching comment on, do not kill your grandma by catching coronavirus and passing by matching coronavirus and passing it on, it’s very by catching coronavirus and passing it on, it’s very frustrating, because the use have been instructed because the use have been instmcted to Eat Out because the use have been instructed to Eat Out To Help Out, told to go back to school and that is exactly what we have done, but we are still the ones being blamed. Tia. You’re starting your first as well. Yes, I am starting my first year as well and I have been told that universities are returning for the mental health of young people and I understand that and it is important, but the fact is that we are returning to university physically for four hours, returning to university physically forfour hours, I have eight hours for four hours, I have eight hours of lassons forfour hours, I have eight hours of lessons 3 week, four of which are face—to—face and basically I am face-to-face and basically I am going and face—to—face and basically I am going and exposing myself to so many other people from different parts of the country, being brought together, sharing a kitchen, I know that some of the holes share a kitchen and toilets with ten people, we are being asked to come together for essentially four face—to—face awake essentially four face-to-face awake and we essentially four face—to—face awake and we are not allowed to socialise and I do not think it is massively beneficial for our mental health either, especially now. I am beneficial for our mental health either, especially now. lam being told that if I go to university I may not be able to go home for Christmas and that leaves me with the decision, do I save my mental health now which apparently going to university well, or do I stay away so that I can stay with my family so that I ran stay with my family and see so that I can stay with my family and see people more often than just and see peopla more often thanjust four hours and see people more often than just four hours a week and be at home for Christmas? Those are horrible decisions that you are having to make and I feel for you decisions that you are having to make and Ifeel for you hearing make and I feel for you hearing that. make and Ifeel for you hearing that. Louise, Labour has supported that. Louise, labour has supported the that. Louise, Labour has supported the government in trying to make sure that education continues and seeing what is happening more in Scotland, Scotland is ahead of England, particularly, is this the England, particularty, is this the right England, particularly, is this the right approach? It would have been incredibly constructive for the government and I have attempted to support them and how to tackle the support them and how to tackla the virus support them and how to tackle the virus because it is not good for the pub“: virus because it is not good for the public to hear that. In terms of universities. We supported schools reopening. We want to see students going back to university, but with millions of students moving across the country, it was always going, there was always going to be increased demand for testing, there needed to be clear guidance in order to make campuses Covid secure and there needed to be a proper Track and Trace system underpinning that. Given that we are where we are, do you think it is right that students, we are not sure what will happen in England but students in Scotland will not be able to go home. It is grossly unfair to tell students they ran grossly unfair to tell students they can return to university... I do not ran return to university... I do not think it is right can return to university... I do not think it is right that we are asking them to return to university, the first time living away from home and then being told they cannot socialise and potentially not return home to their families. Tia said it is about improving mental health and I think that will be deteriorating for it. It is really tough on the students and let us remember there was an added problem for them and the universities, because of the way the government mishandled the exam system, they ended up having to allow more people to be able to go allow more peopla to be able to go to university allow more people to be able to go to university and that was very late in the day. Universities have stmggled, in the day. Universities have struggled, they have massive financial problems, to make their financial problams, to make their rampuses financial problems, to make their campuses and accommodation Covid secure and then there was a massive increase in students because of the incompetence over the A—level incompetence over the A-level system. The incompetence over the A—level system. The government have made it even more difficult for universities, even more difficult for students and again, I do not see them take an action, giving more support to universities who are having to struggle with S. Alok, this has got public health implications and you cannot this has got public health implications and you cannotjust implications and you cannot just allow implications and you cannotjust allow universities and students to fend for themselves, they need support and I do not see why they are not getting it. A number of points there. I am not an expert in education but I think it is clear that young people, there was always that young peopla, there was always going to be that young people, there was always going to be transmission and it is whether you are off the view that it is better to be safe and they are a long way from Granny and you could argue that this is the time for them to get it, but the point is that students go elsewhere. There needs to be a plan and I think schools have a problem. I got a letter, sorry, an e-mail have a problem. I got a letter, sorry, an e—mail today, from a guy sorry, an e-mail today, from a guy who sits on sorry, an e—mail today, from a guy who sits on the parents, he is on the Board of Governors, and he was making the point that he has got teachers having to do Covid claims and they are struggling to stay on and they are stmggling to stay on top and to and they are struggling to stay on top and to deliver teaching at home for kids that cannot attend and they need more resources. I was able to pay for extra cleaning and extra measures, because I am a business and I think maybe it might help if the government could look at how they could support, to work out the right protocol and provide funding for schools and universities to help them deliver that kind of safe environment. 50, Alok, what is the environment. So, Alok, what is the plan? If there environment. 50, Alok, what is the plan? If there has been an outbreak in Liverpool, 87 cases, if we see in England what in Liverpool, 87 rases, if we see in England what is in Liverpool, 87 cases, if we see in England what is happening in Scotland, what is the plan? I will acknowledge, it has been a tough time for young people. I have two time for young peopla. I have two daughters time for young people. I have two daughters who are of university age and it has been very tough. There is the point about making sure that students are able to go to university, younger children to be in school, I think that is really important for their mental health and well—being and important in and well-being and important in terms of and well—being and important in terms of their development. We are working with the university sector to ensure that they have the advice in terms of keeping premises safe... (“an you see a in terms of keeping premises safe... Can you see a situation happening in (“an you see a situation happening in England like in Can you see a situation happening in England like in Scotland, where university students are not allowed to go home? Not allowed to go to the pub? I hope we do not get to that, but that does require... Is that in your planning? We have always said and we set it right from the start of this pandemic, we keep all options on the table and under review. Point now is that we want people to follow the rules and the people to follow the mles and the guidance people to follow the rules and the guidance that we put in place now and if they do that, we will be able to get under control. You were a fresh ones! How realistic is it to expect people going away from home for the first time to university to stay two metres away from literally everyone? It is of course very difficult, but from what I have observed, young people are very responsible and they understand the reason that we asked people to follow the guidance on the rails and going back to the support for universities, we are making financial support available and obviously they will have less obviously they will have lass foreign obviously they will have less foreign students coming and that support is being provided on this idea that we are somehow leaving the sector unsupported, that is not fair. Max, sector unsupported, that is not fair. Alex, what do you think of fair. Max, what do you think of what you have fair. Alex, what do you think of what you have heard? I think what Alok said about going to university helping your mental health, may not going home for Christmas is so much worse than we going to university. So much worse than you not going to university? I would So much worse than you not going to university? Iwould have So much worse than you not going to university? Iwould havejust So much worse than you not going to university? I would have just stayed university? Iwould have just stayed at home university? I would have just stayed at home and on all of my course onUne at home and on all of my course online which I am basically doing anyway, I online which I am basically doing anyway, lam having online which I am basically doing anyway, I am having all but two hours of online lectures and I could have stayed at home and had Christmas with my family. I am the only son, my dad has cancer, they have had such a difficult year and now for them to know, they knew the risk of higher education and infection and for them to say, there is a chance you will miss Christmas, after all they have been through, it is unacceptable. Alex, I hope that does not happen and I am terribly sorry about your father as well. And Tia and Sinem, good luck with this. RR is up and I think we could talk about this for quite sometime and tonight all our questions came from about this for quite sometime and tonight all our questions came from Chingford and next week we will have our virtual audience from Carlisle our virtual audience from (“artisla and our virtual audience from (“artisle and the our virtual audience from Carlisle and the week after that we will be in Coventry and if you live in the cities or in the area around them please get in touch because we really want to hear what you have got to say. I think the next few weeks will be interesting and challenging. You can apply by going challanging. You ran apply by going to the challenging. You can apply by going to the website and follow the instructions there. We would love to instmctions there. We would love to hear from you. instructions there. We would love to hear from you. Adrian Chiles and guests are on Radio Five Live now with Question Time Extra Time and you ran see with Question Time Extra Time and you can see how to get in touch on you ran see how to get in touch on screen now. you can see how to get in touch on screen now. For now, thank you very much to our panel for coming here tonight. Devi, thank you for much to our panel for coming here tonight. Devi, thank you forjoining tonight. Devi, thank you for joining us down tonight. Devi, thank you forjoining us down the line and thank you to our audience in Chingford for joining in the programme and thank you to you as always for watching. From Question Time, goodbye.