Tonight, we are in Liverpool, and welcome to Question Time. On the panel, Helen Whately, the government’s Culture Minister, until recently deputy chair of the Conservatives, Labour Shadow Conservatives, labour Shadow Attorney Conservatives, Labour Shadow Attorney General in England and Wales, Labour peer and mineral Wales, labour peer and mineral jeremy Wales, Labour peer and mineral Jeremy Corbyn’s in a circle, Shami jeremy Corbyn’s in a cirda, Shami Chakrabarti, Jeremy Corbyn’s in a circle, Shami Chakrabarti, Alyn Smith, MP for 15 years and Europe spokesperson at Westminster for the SNP, Madeline Grant, journalist and assistant comment editor at the Telegraph, an actor and musician best known for his leading rola actor and musician best known for his leading role as DC Hathaway in his leading rola as DC Hathaway in the his leading role as DC Hathaway in the detective drama Lewis, Laurence Fox. Welcome to our panel, to you at home and, of course, our Welcome to our panel, to you at home and, of course, ouraudience Welcome to our panel, to you at home and, of course, our audience here as usual. Our and, of course, our audience here as usual. Ouraudience and, of course, our audience here as usual. Our audience has been selected to reflect the current selected to reﬂect the current political selected to reflect the current political picture, depending where we are, so in England there are more Conservatives than Labour, plus a Conservatives than labour, plus a smaller Conservatives than Labour, plus a smaller number from other parties, and I look forward to hearing from all of you. You can argue along and all of you. You ran argue along and join in the all of you. You can argue along and join in the conversation on social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s have our media at BBC Question Time. Let’s have ourfirst question media at BBC Question Time. Let’s have our first question from Tom Stevenson. Stevenson. With reducing passenger Stevenson. with reducing passenger duty only Stevenson. With reducing passenger duty only lead to more domestic ﬂights and duty only lead to more domestic flights and worsen the climate ﬂights and worsen the climate crisis? flights and worsen the climate crisis? Flybe has been in the news, and it’s not entirely clear what the government is doing to help that ailing regional airline. What are ailing regionalairtine. what are you doing? ailing regional airline. What are you doing? Will you reduce air you doing? will you reduce air passenger you doing? Will you reduce air passenger duty to help them out? The top line, and the thing that I welcome as a government minister, with particular responsibility for tourism, is that Flybe will keep ﬂying, and tourism, is that Flybe will keep flying, and that is really good ﬂying, and that is really good news, flying, and that is really good news, because they operate over a third of domestic flights in the UK third of domestic ﬂights in the UK and third of domestic flights in the UK and connect parts of the UK, places "TY and connect parts of the UK, places very hard to get to by any other means, so very hard to get to by any other means, sol very hard to get to by any other means, so I think it’s a good thing that Flybe will keep flying. I can’t that Flybe will keep ﬂying. I can’t go into the that Flybe will keep flying. I can’t go into the detail of what may or may not have been agreed with Flybe. Should expect a reduction in air passenger duty? The government will review it, and they will want to make sure that parts of the UK continue to be connected and recognise the role of flying is part recognise the role of ﬂying is part of that. recognise the role of flying is part of that. It sounds like you are softening it up for a reduction. Wouldn’t want to speculate on the outcome of any review, and we do that hand in aware of our ambitions on climate change and our commitment to go zero carbon in 2050, which needs to happen hand—in—hand with needs to happen hand-in-hand with people being needs to happen hand—in—hand with people being able to get about the UK. Do you think helping a company like Flybe, which a lot of UK. Do you think helping a company like Flybe, which a lot ofjobs, is commence you at with helping to resolve the climate crisis, and we heard David Attenborough talking heard David Athenborough talking today heard David Attenborough talking today about where the climate crisis is? I today about where the climate crisis is? Ithink today about where the climate crisis is? I think people will probably do is? I think peopla will probably do what is is? I think people will probably do what is cheapest, and it depends whether flying or the train what is cheapest, and it depends whetherﬂying or the train is whether ﬂying or the train is cheaper, whetherﬂying or the train is cheaper, and, you know, I whetherﬂying or the train is cheaper, and, you know, lam not so against ﬂying, cheaper, and, you know, lam not so against flying, sorry. Is an actor, against ﬂying, sorry. Is an actor, you have to ﬂy against flying, sorry. Is an actor, you have to fly all over the place. you have to ﬂy all over the place. Yeah, my you have to fly all over the place. Yeah, my carbon footprint is huge, but we make up for it by preaching to everybody how they should change their lives. APPLAUSE APPMUSE I APPLAUSE I think there was a lot in what the minister said about people flying to minister said about peopla ﬂying to places that minister said about people flying to places that are very hard to reach by any other means. Why? It seems to by any other means. why? It seems to me it is by any other means. Why? It seems to me it is often too cheap to fly me it is often too cheap to ﬂy within me it is often too cheap to fly within this relatively small country, and too expensive to get the train. APPLAUSE A round trip from Exeter to Manchester, Flybe, £68, this is on a particular day, and by rail, £141. It’s so much cheaper to fly. That’s It’s so much cheaper to ﬂy. That’s a problam, and I It’s so much cheaper to fly. That’s a problem, and I understand it must a problam, and I understand it must be very difficult a problem, and I understand it must be very difficult in government when people are going to lose their be very difficult in government when people are going to lose theirjobs, peopla are going to lose theirjobs, and no people are going to lose theirjobs, and no doubt your review will involve consulting the trade unions and people who stand to lose their and peopla who stand to lose their jobs but, in and people who stand to lose their jobs but, in the end, as David Attenborough said in his interview, Athenborough said in his interview, this is an Attenborough said in his interview, this is an emergency and this is now. We need to take urgent action. APPLAUSE And that means not cutting air passenger duty but investing, and yes, people need jobs, and people need to travel, but we need to invest in jobs need to travel, but we need to invest injobs in a green revolution, and the travel should be by train, not flying short distances by train, not ﬂying short distances within by train, not flying short distances within these islands. You can’t get to the Scilly Isles by train, so that’s an example, and it’s hard to get there by other means. That’s what I meant by there being some places that are hard to get to, but I agree, absolutely we want to be investing in other forms of public transport and rail, as I hope people transport and rail, as I hope peopla know, is a very transport and rail, as I hope people know, is a very high priority, and Northern Powerhouse Rail, linking cities in the north, is galloping in Liverpool. But when? We are running Liverpool. But when? We are mnning out of time. Liverpool. But when? We are running out of time. The man in the purple out of time. The man in the purpla top. I out of time. The man in the purpla top. Ithink out of time. The man in the purple top. I think there are several points we need to take on board. One is the need to decide what camp we is the need to decide what ramp we are going to be is the need to decide what camp we are going to be in, whether we are going to bail them out or we are not going to support them. We bailed at the banks but we didn’t bail out the banks but we didn’t bailout Thomas the banks but we didn’t bail out Thomas Cook. 50 there is an issue. Thomas Cook. So there is an issue. You are right about Thomas Cook. 50 there is an issue. You are right aboutjobs, and we also need to think about how we are going to protect the environment, so it’s all together in the package, and we need to decide which camp we and we need to decide which ramp we are going to be in and we need to decide which camp we are going to be in as a and a government. What do you think? —— is government. what do you think? -- is a country and a government. What do you think? —— is a country and a government. I am with the actor. 0h, with Lawrence! just brief, that’s with the actor. 0h, with Lawrence! Just brief, that’s the way to do it. just brief, that’s the way to do it. The man at Just brief, that’s the way to do it. The man at the back with the glasses. Is the issue goes further than just reducing climate change and tackling the problems airlines and tackling the problams aidines are facing. and tackling the problems airlines are facing. Flybe is a company which is focusing on small demand routes, on short—haul routes as well, with on short-haul routes as well, with have just which on short—haul routes as well, with have just which have business and demand from the poorest areas of society. Flybe is operating a business model where it charges half the price of other modes of transport, and this has been hit at double tax rate because it flies double tax rate because it ﬂies internally. double tax rate because it flies internally. This money is supposed to be spent on reducing climate change, but we are opening a third mnway at change, but we are opening a third runway at Heathrow with the same amount of funds we are taking in from tax, which is supposed to reduce climate change. But policy is hypocritical and they need to either support the airlines and bail them support the airtines and bail them out or support the airlines and bail them out or actually help the climate. We can’t play both sides of the argument here. Yes, the woman there. Is part of the younger generation, I find it insulting that our futures are being putting behind bailing out plain companies when our government ran’t plain companies when our government can’t even make climate change a priority, they can’t fund any steps towards it, so why are we letting aeroplane companies stay put? Do you think you would feel like that if you worked for that company? It’s a difficult issue with employment, but we need to put in steps and have other employment which relies on more renewable sources, and we need to stop relying on fossil fuels as much for employment. APPLAUSE APPMUSE I APPLAUSE I am confused about what it is the government is trying to achieve because, on the one hand, their justification is that they are keen to rebalance the regions and demonstrate to them, their voter base, that they mean to level up the economy, but at the same time this step has taken the effect of putting a lot of money into which peoples a lot of money into which peoplas pockets, a lot of money into which peoples pockets, because the consortium which owns Flybe, you know, it is part of one of the biggest beneficiaries will be Virgin, Delta, Richard Branson. Are we saying none of these people might have stepped in to make up the air passenger duty that was overdue? I don’t see why it necessarily had to come from the pub“: necessarily had to come from the public purse. APPLAUSE The other thing that is deeply inconsistent is how on earth this squares with the government’s environmental aims of reaching zero carbon by 2050 and, to be fair, I don’t think this is just the Conservatives, and I have no doubt that if jeremy Conservatives, and I have no doubt that ifJeremy Corbyn were Prime Minister he would also be bailing out Flybe while trying to push for out Flybe whila trying to push for zero out Flybe while trying to push for zero carbon by 2030. You have a completely contradictory set of environmental policies where, on the one hand, you prop up airlines, but one hand, you prop up airtines, but you also impose one hand, you prop up airlines, but you also impose heavy fuel duty is such that thousands of pensioners stmggle to such that thousands of pensioners struggle to heat their homes, and at the same time we hear a lot of preaching about the environment but very little discussion of specifics. very little discussion of specific. Bleating very little discussion of specifics. Bleating about the environment? Do you think David Attenborough was you think David Athenborough was bleating you think David Attenborough was bleating today? if politicians don’t talk about specifics, that’s my talk about specific, that’s my problem. I talk about specifics, that’s my problem. I would talk about specifics, that’s my problem. Iwould prefer a politician who said, here is my plan for the environment, I will spend 2% of GDP environment, I will spend 296 of GDP buying up environment, I will spend 2% of GDP buying up farmland to plant trees. I would prefer that to the current system, which is to rush in an extreme Italy -- system, which is to rush in an extreme Italy —— extremely extreme Italy -- extremely far-reaching extreme Italy —— extremely far—reaching target which will have far-reaching target which will have big effects far—reaching target which will have big effects and then leave it for future politicians to sort out rather than having any indication of how to get there. Alyn Smith, when it comes to the Scottish company, and I should mention that sets’s owners, they are putting in 30 million, so they are not putting nothing in. When it comes to the nothing in. when it comes to the Scottish nothing in. When it comes to the Scottish Government, you wanted to reduce air passenger duty by 50% but reduce air passenger duty by 5096 but then you wrote reduce air passenger duty by 50% but then you wrote back on it, so what is your view on helping out a company like Flybe? The Scottish Government was the first country to declare a climate emergency, we are on track to be carbon neutral by 2040. Plan, but you wanted to reduce departure tax. That is a former policy. We are in a climate emergency. You wrote back on it, there are enough. We need action, and the UK policy on which is why we are wondering what the policy is. Mynach was allowed to go bust, but we are trying to find ways of helping Flybe. Flybe operates ﬂights helping Flybe. Flybe operates flights line —— lifeline services to ﬂights line -- lifeline services to some flights line —— lifeline services to some islands, so this is serious, but we are implementing a climate but we are implamenting a climate change policy but we are implementing a climate change policy and doing well with that, but there are needs, as Shami says, there are decades of underinvestment in proper, sustainable public transport, and we need to change the game and stop the point-scoring, need to change the game and stop the point—scoring, get together and get point-scoring, get together and get real, point—scoring, get together and get real, because this is an emergency right now and what is happening is real. Should we stop some short—haul real. Should we stop some short-haul ﬂights? real. Should we stop some short—haul flights? Research discourage people ﬂights? Research discourage people from flights? Research discourage people from them, but I’d like as little as I ran. from them, but I’d like as little as Iran. -- from them, but I’d like as little as I ran. -- we from them, but I’d like as little as I can. —— we should discourage. Hay I ran. -- we should discourage. Hay fever season I can. —— we should discourage. Hay fever season has started in Stockholm right now, today. The cherry blossom is already out there, in january. If we cherry blossom is already out there, inJanuary. If we think climate in january. If we think climate change is far inJanuary. If we think climate change is far away and for Indonesian islands and Australian bushfires, it’s in our communities right now. Scottish farmers have been seeing all sorts of implications that we need to get been seeing all sorts of implications that we need to get really serious. We want to maintain lifeline services, but we need to be clear about moving away from carbon to a sustainable economy, and Scotland is doing well with that. Come and see our ideas. Cue the man at the back. The 2058 is wholly inadequate for a developed country like the British Isles. It zero in like the British Islas. It zero in 2050, that like the British Isles. It zero in 2050, that date was mentioned in the international panel on climate change report is the global net zero carbon, to not exceed 1.5 degrees Celsius in global warming, above which would be catastrophic. We are already going to suffer from serious consequences. Above that, even worse, tens to hundreds of millions of people displaced. The 2050 date of peopla displaced. The 2050 date is an of people displaced. The 2050 date is an absolute copout for this country. We are a developed country and should be leading the way. It should be brought forward. I and should be leading the way. It should be brought forward. Ifind it quite ironic that the SNP are saying that the carbon neutral thing is important, which it is, but isn’t Nicola Sturgeon’s main budget plan, if they get independence, coming from oil, which is a fossil if they get independence, coming from oil, which is a fossilfuel from oil, which is a fossil fuel used to from oil, which is a fossilfuel used to pollute things? Maybe, if the SNP want to get independence, she has to start looking at other “75 she has to start looking at other ways of forming the economy, rather than relying on fossil ways of forming the economy, rather than relying on fossilfuels, which than relying on fossil fuels, which are killing the than relying on fossilfuels, which are killing the planet? That is what we are doing, investing massively in renewables. Scotland has the energy jackpot, we have got renewals, wind, wave, biomass, water jackpot, we have got renewals, wind, wave, biomass, waterfalling from wave, biomass, water falling from the sky wave, biomass, waterfalling from the sky regularly, and all sorts of the sky regularty, and all sorts of stuff we the sky regularly, and all sorts of stuff we are exporting, and you are right, we need to decarbonise the right, we need to dearbonise the economy and right, we need to decarbonise the economy and we have a plan to do that. That is very much part of Scottish economy. Ellen, let me come Scottish economy. Ellan, let me come back to give Scottish economy. Ellen, let me come back to give the let’s remind ourselves what David Attenborough ourselves what David Athenborough said today, ourselves what David Attenborough said today, as well as now is the moment of climate crisis, he said, this is urgent, we know how to solve it but we refuse to take steps we know have to be taken, so you represent the government which has been in power represent the government which has been in powerfor ten years represent the government which has been in power for ten years and you refuse to take the steps which have to be taken. Since 2015, our greenhouse gas emissions have been reduced by 25%, emissions have been reduced by 2596, while the emissions have been reduced by 25%, while the economy has been growing. Obviously that is not including aviation, shipping, which people are aviation, shipping, which peopla are keen on aviation, shipping, which people are keen on pointing out. Just in terms keen on pointing out. just in terms of what keen on pointing out. Just in terms of what the figure actually means. We are making huge on switching from fossil fuels to having a significant part of our energy from renewables. part of our energy from renewablas. And part of our energy from renewables. And we have got huge, ambitious plans. The gentleman up there said 2050 is not soon enough. Absolutely, I am totally alive and worried myself to the climate change crisis. Do you think it is not soon enough as well? Well, we are the first major economy to even be setting an ambition of 2050. Let’s realise that that is quite a substantial ambition, to be leading the world on that. To the gentleman who suggested we should choose a camp, I don’t we should choose a ramp, I don’t think we we should choose a camp, I don’t think we should choose a camp, I think we should choose a ramp, I think we think we should choose a camp, I think we should do both. So, we should continue to aim for growth, we should be ambitious about growth and Green growth and we should achieve growth hand—in—hand with achieve growth hand-in-hand with making sure achieve growth hand—in—hand with making sure that we reduce our emissions, we go carbon neutral by 2050 and we leave the environment in a better state than it was when we inherited it. I a better state than it was when we inherited it. lam a better state than it was when we inherited it. I am going to take another question, before I do, I inherited it. I am going to take another question, before I do, I just want to tell you that we will be in Stoke Newington in London next week and the week after that, we will be in Buxton, so if you would like to be in the audience, call will be in Buxton, so if you would like to be in the audience, callus like to be in the audience, all us on... Or you ran go like to be in the audience, callus on... Or you can go to the Question on... Or you ran go to the Question Time on... Or you can go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions there. Let’s take our instmctions there. Let’s take our second instructions there. Let’s take our second question. second question. Should the Sussexes profit from their royal status? Is that what you think they may end up doing? I that what you think they may end up doing? Ithink that what you think they may end up doing? I think most likely it is what they may end up doing, to be honest. We have already seen them trademark their Sussex name, and I think it is highly unlikely that they will not continue to carry on this trend. Laurence Fox, what is your view on it all? I feel sorry for them, in a way. Because it is difficult when you’ve got a new baby and all of that, and it is hard, but I and all of that, and it is hard, but Ijust have and all of that, and it is hard, but I just have this feeling, and all of that, and it is hard, but Ijust have this feeling, surely Harry must have had a chat to Meghan at some point and said, by the way, darting, this is at some point and said, by the way, darling, this is going to be misery, darting, this is going to be misery, and you don’t darling, this is going to be misery, and you don’t have to marry me if you don’t want to. Maybe they did! May be they did, and then, you want to hop out, it is, like, can we have to hop out, it is, like, ran we have the the cottage back and your HRHs? So, you think the cottage hack and your HRHs? So, you think they the cottage back and your HRHs? So, you think they are doing the wrong thing, you think it is disrespectful? I think it is really unfair, because we’ve got the Queen, who is an extremely different ball game, she is duty ahead of everything else, and when you’re younger, you do want to make a life or your family, so younger, you do want to make a life or yourfamily, sol younger, you do want to make a life or yourfamily, so I do emphasise or your family, so I do emphasise with them, or yourfamily, so I do emphasise with them, but I do think there is a little bit of having cake and eating little bit of having rake and eating it, which I little bit of having cake and eating it, which I don’t enjoy. The problem we’ve got with this is that Meghan has agreed to be Harry’s wife and has agreed to be Harrrs wife and then the has agreed to be Harry’s wife and then the press have torn her to pieces. That’s what they did. Let’s be really clear about what this is, let’s all be really clear about what this is, let’s call it be really clear about what this is, let’s all it by be really clear about what this is, let’s call it by its name, it’s let’s all it by its name, it’s racism. let’s call it by its name, it’s racism. She is a black woman and she’s been in... It’s not racism, you can’t... She has been torn to pieces. No, it’s not. We are the most tolerant, lovely country in Europe. It is so easy to throw the card of racism at everybody and it is getting boring. You are a white privileged male who has... Can I privileged male who has... (“an I just...? I privileged male who has... (“an I just...? Iran’t privileged male who has... Can I just...? I can’t help what I am, I was born like this, it is an immutable characteristic, so to call me a white privileged male is to be racist. You’re being racist. I am racist. You’re being racist. lam not taking a racist. You’re being racist. I am not taking a view either way, I will just add in that Priti Patel, the Home Secretary, also took the view that it was not racism, I am not making a judgment on that. The woman in the red top, you were nodding your head vigourously, what have you got to say? I think when Meghan first married Harry, I thought it first married Harry, Ithought it was a first married Harry, I thought it was a breath of fresh air, I thought it was good. I thought it was nice to have somebody like her, who was not a royal, she came from America, she came from an ordinary background, I thought that was all great. But I think that she’s actually great. But I think that she’s actuallyjoined a club and now she actually joined a club and now she just doesn’t actuallyjoined a club and now she just doesn’t the rules. And she just doesn’t the mles. And she wants to opt just doesn’t the rules. And she wants to opt out. And as Laurence said, I wants to opt out. And as Laurence said, Ithink wants to opt out. And as Laurence said, I think surely she must have realised... She is an intelligent woman, she must have realised some of what was going to happen. But it might be Harry who is driving this? It might be but it seems to be that it is Meghan, I don’t know. We can it is Meghan, I don’t know. We ran only speak you it is Meghan, I don’t know. We can only speak you late. What is your only speak you late. what is your take on this, only speak you late. What is your take on this, Shami? I think you’ve got to walk around in someone else’s shoes. I know that to be royalty is not to be the worst off person in the country or the planet but I still try to walk around in someone else’s shoes and I do think that some of the things that are being said are pretty harsh, and I would never say that because you’re a white man, you don’t have a perspective, but I would ask you to consider the perspective of anybody who has had a different experience. And I know that Britain is a wonderful country, and I am second to no one in my love of my country, but loving your country doesn’t mean that you say there is no racism in the country. And there are no issues in the press. Forgive me... I think in this city perhaps more than anywhere else in this country, you know about abuses by parts of the press, and I... press, and I... And if we want to be press, and I... And ifwe wantto be specific and look press, and I... And if we want to be specific and look at evidence, there was a piece I think it was in Buzzfeed today, where there was a Bunfeed today, where there was a very, very Buzzfeed today, where there was a very, very forensic comparison between the treatment of the two princes... Shall I quote? This is the Daily Express, so, the Daily Express is talking about Kate choosing flowers and in August they choosing ﬂowers and in August they said, in choosing flowers and in August they said, in 2011, this was for the wedding, the bride herself, the bouquet, was effortlessly elegant bouquet, was eﬂorﬂassly elagant and bouquet, was effortlessly elegant and understated. Then the Daily Express on Meghan choosing flowers Express on Meghan choosing ﬂowers for her Express on Meghan choosing flowers for her wedding, how Meghan Markle’s ﬂowers might for her wedding, how Meghan Markle’s flowers might have put Princess ﬂowers might have put Princess Margaret’s flowers might have put Princess Margaret’s life at risk. I am not saying that represent the Daily Express’s perspective. And it saying that represent the Daily Express’s perspective. And it goes on and it goes Express’s perspective. And it goes on and it goes on and one is touching their bump to much, avocados are good, and avocados are... It is so forensically done. are... It is so forensic-ally done. And it’s not just are... It is so forensically done. And it’s notjust the press. I am And it’s not just the press. I am not on And it’s notjust the press. I am not on social media because I am a dinosaur, but also I am not on it because some of it is so awful. And forgive me, I do think that the Duchess of Sussex has had some really rough treatment. The question was, is it right that they should profit from their royal status of? profit from their royal stems of? It’s profit from their royal status of? It’s tricky, isn’t it, because we can’t have it both ways. If we say we want a slimmed down Royal Family, we want to spend less public money on people who are not in the direct on peopla who are not in the direct line of on people who are not in the direct line of succession, et cetera, you ran say that on line of succession, et cetera, you can say that on the one hand, and ran say that on the one hand, and then you say can say that on the one hand, and then you say they should not profit. . . then you say they should not profit... Prince Harry cannot escape his birth and his status, and part of that is a very, very tragic story about losing your mother when you’re too young, I have some sympathy for that, I have some empathy for that and I think we should just tone it down a little bit did you want to come back in? Yeah, I think it is come back in? Yeah, Ithink it is one of the come back in? Yeah, I think it is one of the dangerous things about throwing racism around in this country, which we are doing a lot at the moment, is, people become so the moment, is, peopla become so conscious the moment, is, people become so conscious of it that things like the Manchester grooming scandal get ignored. So that we need to be careful that we need to call out careful that we need to all out racism careful that we need to call out racism when it is seen and when it is obvious and we should stand together to condemn it but for fear of sounding racist, there has been horrific things have happened in Manchester and in towns all over the north of England and we should be careful and use racism when it is there an obvious and not call someone racist there an obvious and not call someone racistjust because they someone racist just because they don’t agree someone racistjust because they don’t agree with you. So, coming back to the question, when this story broke, Wednesday a week ago, I don’t think any of us could have foreseen how it was going to go, we have now obviously got the Daily Mail and the Mail on Sunday possibly falling Mail and the Mail on Sunday possibly calling Meghan Markle’s father, the falling Meghan Markle’s father, the court case, calling Meghan Markle’s father, the court case, the libel case, what is court rase, the libel rase, what is your view on court case, the libel case, what is your view on what is happening? I think it makes the UK look like it has lost its marbles, forgive me. I really struggle, with all of the really stmggle, with all of the issues really struggle, with all of the issues that are kicking about in the world, to find any headspace for this whatsoever. I think the Royal Family has been... The press alternates with the Royals between complete sycophancy or sheer hatred. And we have seen it over the years with each member of the Royal Family. But there is an issue with pub“: Family. But there is an issue with public spending, it is not entirely frivolous. Security and what have you. Of all the issues facing us, I don’t think this is the biggest one. If they want to be private citizens, good luck to them, I wish them well. If they absolutely give up their right to public money when that happens, absolutely. But this isn’t the issue we need to be talking about. Well, lots of people want to about. Well, lots of peopla want to talk about. Well, lots of people want to talk about it, and that is why we are doing it. Lots of people want to are doing it. Lots of peopla want to talk are doing it. Lots of people want to talk about celebrity Love Island, that doesn’t mean it’s important. Not in this room I am glad to say. The racism is a bit more serious, the idea that there is no racism in Britain is a serious issue. No one said there is no racism. No doubt there has been a great deal of racism directed against Meghan Markle from members of the public and some sections of the press. But I think in general, what is really aggravating people isn’t the colour aggravating peopla isn’t the colour of her aggravating people isn’t the colour of her skin but it is the hypocrisy that they have shown on many occasions, even the way in which they want to exit the Royal Family is, they are not proposing to be, like, the Dutch Royal Family, where you cycle to work and maintain a regular you cycle to work and maintain a regularjob. What they you cycle to work and maintain a regular job. What they are you cycle to work and maintain a regularjob. What they are proposing regularjob. what they are proposing is a strange regularjob. What they are proposing is a strange hybrid where you retain many of the perks and privileges of being in the Royal Family, but you expect none of their duty. And to go back to the original question about, are we going to see them cashing in on their browned? Yes, I think we will. -- on on their browned? Yes, I think we will. —— on their brand? I think we will. -- on their brand? I think we are going to get a will. —— on their brand? I think we are going to get a kind of woke celebrity, bit of Kardashian thrown in for good measure, type thing. You have painted an extraordinary vision! They say they want to avoid press coverage but I think what they are hoping to achieve with this brand is to exchange UK coverage for US coverage. I think the public empathises with their need to live a more private life, and there are days out of the Royal Family which would enable them to do that, but would enabla them to do that, but what therre would enable them to do that, but what they’re proposing is not a what therre proposing is not a retreat what they’re proposing is not a retreat from public life at all, I think the hypocrisy in that is really annoying a lot of people. really annoying a lot of peopla. Fergie got really annoying a lot of people. Fergie got ten times worse press than Meghan has ever had. And as soon the press say boo to Meghan, I feel she pulls the racist card. I am, as she says, a woman of colour, and I feel she am, as she says, a woman of colour, and Ifeel she pulls the racist card and I feel she pulls the racist card every time, and Ifeel she pulls the racist card every time, when there is something she doesn’t like, she is straight off with, it is racist. I’m not sure she personally has ever said that, but other people have said that for but other peopla have said that for her. And Harry but other people have said that for her. And Harry has mentioned it, I think. I her. And Harry has mentioned it, I think. Ifeel as if they her. And Harry has mentioned it, I think. I feel as if they seem her. And Harry has mentioned it, I think. Ifeel as if they seem rather naive to me, and they have got their priorities all... They talk naive to me, and they have got their priorities all. .. They talk about priorities all... They talk about being family priorities all. .. They talk about being family orientated... being family orientated... But they seem to be... I know they’re seem to be... I know therre vulnerabla, seem to be... I know they’re vulnerable, but their priorities, they didn’t even tell the Queen, and they told, did they tell the media? They just seem to they told, did they tell the media? Theyjust seem to me a couple who They just seem to me a couple who are quite naive. Theyjust seem to me a couple who are quite naive. Just priorities, are quite naive. just priorities, why didn’t are quite naive. Just priorities, why didn’t they tell the Queen? You tell your family first. They go on about their tell your family first. They go on about theirfamily, their tell your family first. They go on about their family, their child and everything. Obviously, we don’t know if they didn’t tell the Queen or not, we are all circulating. Because we never fall out without families, right? Never! Let me hear we never fall out without families, right? Never! Let me hearfrom right? Never! Let me hear from Helen. right? Never! Let me hearfrom Helen. Where there are questions of Helen. where there are questions of racism, let’s just Helen. Where there are questions of racism, let’s just continue to put their message out there that it is not acceptable in our society, we won’t tolerate it and we shouldn’t tolerate it from members of the Royal Family. Do you think there is racism? I’m sure that Meghan, like others, have experienced racism. I haven’t seen the analysis that you went into, but let’s... What about went into, but lat’s... what about the original went into, but let’s... What about the original question, should they profit from their royal status? To profit from their royal stems? To come profit from their royal status? To come back to the overall point, being a member of the Royal Family, there is dearty being a member of the Royal Family, there is clearly great material there is dearty great material benefits, there is clearly great material benefits, but it must be tough living your entire life in the pub“: living your entire life in the public eye. I can’t imagine... 0K, living your entire life in the public eye. I can’t imagine... OK, I public eye. Iran’t imagine... OK, I am public eye. I can’t imagine... OK, I am sometimes in the public eye but not that much of my life is in the pub“: not that much of my life is in the public eye, I think it must be really tough, and a huge number of duties associated with it and you don’t get to make all your own choices and I have huge respect for the Royal Family, huge respect for the Queen, and it is a shame that this is being played out so publicly but I hope they will be able to come to a conclusion and move on, and Azman fix said, there is lots of other stuff that we be focusing on. m: We have spent ten minutes talking about a family of multimillionaires who exist on state subsidies benefit. Can we move on to something benefit. (“an we move on to something more important, benefit. Can we move on to something more important, please? APPLAUSE Well, the only reason we asked the question was because so many from the audience wanted to discuss it, but I was about to move on. Shall we do that? We are simply reflecting do that? We are simply reﬂacting the do that? We are simply reflecting the questions put to us. This is how it works. Lucy O’Brien, let’s hear from you. Considering Boris johnson’s from you. Considering Boris Johnson’s comments about Liverpool johnson’s comments about Liverpool and its Johnson’s comments about Liverpool and its overwhelming support for labour, and its overwhelming support for Labour, what can we now expect from labour, what ran we now expect from the Tory Labour, what can we now expect from the Tory government? APPLAUSE Lucy, when you talk about Boris johnson’s Lucy, when you talk about Boris Johnson’s comments about Liverpool, johnson’s comments about Liverpool, are you referring Johnson’s comments about Liverpool, are you referring to the editorial which was in the Spectator in 200A? which was in the Spectator in 2004? Yes. It which was in the Spectator in 200A? Yes. It was pretty roundly insulting about Liverpool, and I will pick up a quote for those not familiar, he was the editor, he will not necessarily have written it himself, but he edited the publication, at one quote, they see themselves, that is Liverpudlians, whenever possible as victims and they resent their victim status yet, at the same time, they wallow in it, and he also made insulting references to Hillsborough as well. So, you want to kick us off. as well. So, you want to kick us off, Shami Chakrabarti? Liverpool boss overwhelming support for labour, so boss overwhelming support for Labour, so what can we expect from a labour, so what ran we expect from a Tory government? Labour, so what can we expect from a Tory government? Well, it depends whether you believe in this redemption that we are now going to see, because the red wall was shattered and we are now going to see a one—nation Conservative see a one-nation Conservative government, see a one—nation Conservative government, led by Boris see a one—nation Conservative government, led by Borisjohnson, government, lad by Boris johnson, and government, led by Boris johnson, and he is going government, led by Borisjohnson, and he is going to govern for the people that voted against him as peopla that voted against him as well as people that voted against him as well as the people that voted for well as the peopla that voted for him. well as the people that voted for him. That is one narrative that he has been keen to put out there since the election. If he was able to live “P the election. If he was able to live up to that promise, clearly a lot of up to that promise, dearty a lot of peopla would up to that promise, clearly a lot of people would be very glad to see peopla would be very glad to see that. I people would be very glad to see that. I am worried, however, people would be very glad to see that. lam worried, however, that there is this other message which is much more aggressive, much more arrogant, much more entitled. We have seen a little bit of it already with this idea that the judges are going to be punished for with this idea that the judges are going to be punished forfinding going to be punished for finding against going to be punished forfinding against Boris going to be punished forfinding against BorisJohnson last autumn, against Boris johnson last autumn, when he against BorisJohnson last autumn, when he shut against BorisJohnson last autumn, when he shutdown government, and when he shut down government, and there are suggestions that a judicial review, which is the way that citizens can hold the government to the law, which will be interfered with. I am just worried that, time and again with Mr johnson, that, time and again with Mr Johnson, nasty that, time and again with Mr Johnson, nastyJohnson wins the day johnson, nasty johnson wins the day over nice Johnson, nastyJohnson wins the day over nicejohnson and, yes, I know over nice johnson and, yes, I know that he did over nicejohnson and, yes, I know that he did apologise, he was made to apologise for his Liverpool remarks some years ago, but it’s not just the people of Liverpool that just the peopla of Liverpool that have just the people of Liverpool that have been insulted. There was a long line of people. We would say, I was line of peopla. We would say, I was a journalist then line of people. We would say, I was a journalist then so that’s OK, but I doubt Madeline would get the same license if she wrote about women looking like letterboxes, etc. APPLAUSE In terms of what can we APPLAUSE In terms of what ran we expect from a Tory In terms of what can we expect from a Tory government, Madeline I think the evidence suggests they are going in a more economically venturing direction that we have seen before from Conservatives. They have realised that many of the voters in the north who voted for them put their trust in them for one election only, perhaps, because they were sceptical of only, perhaps, because they were sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t sceptical of jeremy Corbyn I didn’t think he sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t think he was credible, so sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t think he was credible, sol sceptical ofJeremy Corbyn I didn’t think he was credible, so I think the policy platform will shift dramatically in keeping with the realignment of politics which is realignment of politic which is taking realignment of politics which is taking place, so I would expect a plan to pump money into big infrastructure projects and the NHS, infrastmclure projects and the NHS, and infrastructure projects and the NHS, and there has been suggestion of them are using the new found freedom of Brexit not to potentially liberalise the economy but instead to bypass EU rules state aid to help to bypass EU mles state aid to help PWP “P to bypass EU mles state aid to help prop up ailing to bypass EU rules state aid to help prop up ailing businesses. There has been a myth on the left, and we sought during the election, that Boris sought during the election, that BorisJohnson is some kind of neo— Thatcherite figure, and I don’t think there is evidence for that. I think he is much closer to a Michael Heseltine that happens to disagree with Heseltine on the EU. Yes, the man here. I think we can expect more man here. I think we ran expect more of the same, if man here. I think we can expect more of the same, if not worse. The majority that of the same, if not worse. The majority thatJohnson has got... APPLAUSE APPMUSE I APPLAUSE I think he will exploit it. We have seen already in Liverpool that the government has rejected the renewal of a licensing scheme to do with tenancies. I think a lot of people tenancies. I think a lot of peopla will see tenancies. I think a lot of people will see what the Tories stand for, and that is a bent and isolation not just of Liverpool but the whole of the law. -- just of Liverpool but the whole of the law. —— abandonment and the law. -- abandonment and isolation. the law. —— abandonment and isolation. If anybody believes johnson isolation. If anybody believes Johnson and his mantra of supporting johnson and his mantra of supporting the north, I Johnson and his mantra of supporting the north, I think they are misguided. APPLAUSE You, sir, in the T-shirt. First of all, Shami You, sir, in the T—shirt. First of all, Shami Chakrabarti just used the word entitlement, and as a baroness she would know, wouldn’t she? In terms of Boris she would know, wouldn’t she? In terms of Borisjohnson, for me, I terms of Boris johnson, for me, I think, you know, terms of Borisjohnson, for me, I think, you know, his terms of BorisJohnson, for me, I think, you know, his outlook is sort of. think, you know, his outlook is sort of, you know, hand up, yeah, not think, you know, his outlook is sort of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota hand-out. For of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota hand—out. Forfar of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota hand—out. Forfartoo of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota hand—out. For far too long, of, you know, hand up, yeah, nota hand—out. Forfar too long, this hand-out. For far too long, this country has hand—out. Forfar too long, this country has relied on sort of, you know, supporting individuals, you know, rather know, supporting individuals, you know, ratherthan know, supporting individuals, you know, rather than enabling them to get on in life, yeah, and I think we need to look at moving forward from that. And the woman here in the green cardigan. Is the government going to redirect some of your money “P going to redirect some of your money up to our great northern cities and let us take care of our own affairs? let us take rare of our own affairs? Well, Helan, let us take care of our own affairs? Well, Helen, let me put in some Well, Helan, let me put in some context. Well, Helen, let me put in some context. Since 2010, real Well, Helen, let me put in some context. Since 2010, realterm context. Since 2010, real term funding from context. Since 2010, realterm funding from central government to Liverpool City Council has been cut by 5395, is Liverpool City Council has been cut by 63%, is quite a lot. Several by 6396, is quite a lot. Several hundred by 63%, is quite a lot. Several hundred million, I by 63%, is quite a lot. Several hundred million, Ithink. So what by 63%, is quite a lot. Several hundred million, I think. 50 what is hundred million, Ithink. So what is the Tory hundred million, I think. 50 what is the Tory government going to do for cities like Liverpool? Well, the first thing that might provide you with some reassurance is that this is my second visit to Liverpool within a week. They want more than visits! I mean, that’s lovely... APPLAUSE Something to actually happen! Your time is limited, and I think it was my first visit since the election my first visit since the elaction and I my first visit since the election and I chose it to be to Liverpool, because it is important step someone just shouted out, do you need a map? of just shouted out, do you need a map? Of my own view unlivable is it’s a fantastic city, and had a fantastic visit last Friday. —— my own view of visit last Friday. -- my own view of Liverpool. There visit last Friday. —— my own view of Liverpool. There are really exciting things ahead for Liverpool. I wish the lady who asked the question could feel a bit of excitement that I feel at the moment as we embark on a new decade, that this is going to be a fantastic decade for our country. It’s a fantastic moment of renewal. SOME LAUGHTER IN AUDIENCE. SOME MUGHTER IN AUDIENCE. It’s SOME LAUGHTER IN AUDIENCE. It’s a moment to get excited and grasp the opportunity to stop the honour in a to invest and we are determined to invest in infrastructure, and significant infrastructure, and significa nt direction infrastructure, and significant direction of travel travel for that is new infrastructure connecting the is new infrastmcture connecting the north cities, is new infrastructure connecting the north cities, so you can get between north cities, so you ran get between them and get north cities, so you can get between them and get some of the benefits of being like one larger sister, so we will be investing in infrastructure will be investing in infrastmclure and public will be investing in infrastructure and public services. We know the NHS is stmggling and public services. We know the NHS is struggling with the level of demand and we were put in an increase of funding of £34 billion. We will invest in schools. We are doing fantastic stuff for the country and making sure there is more money in your pocket. 50 country and making sure there is more money in your pocket. So let’s get excited about it! There is quite a lot of laughter. I mean, there are a lot of people in this audience who voted Conservative, but there are dearty voted Conservative, but there are clearly people here who voted Labour. They are laughing, and not very excited. Give the people here one thing that they can get excited one thing that they ran get excited about, say, one thing that they can get excited about, say, OK, the Conservatives are in government, this is one thing to watch for. If you are somebody on a lower income, we are determined that your income will go up. For instance, we are increasing the national living wage, which will be over £10 an hour in this Parliament, over £10 an hour in this Partiament, and we are raising over £10 an hour in this Parliament, and we are raising the threshold on national insurance, so it’s about having more money in your pocket, and that goes hand in hand with our strong record on and that goes hand in hand with our strong record onjobs, so you are strong record on jobs, so you are more likely to strong record onjobs, so you are more likely to be in a job, earning more and having more money in your pocket. Isn’t that a good thing? The woman in the blacktop. I appreciate your comments on the national infrastructure and the national infrastmclure and the national living wage, infrastructure and the national living wage, but with two thirds of children under the poverty line, why are you not helping the actual peopla why are you not helping the actual people why not make a difference in peoples lives? We can build more peoplas lives? We ran build more student peoples lives? We can build more student accommodation at a wonderful things on the docks but, if people things on the docks but, if peopla can’t things on the docks but, if people can’t afford to eat, these are the important things in our country, in my opinion. The woman at the top with the long hair. Talking about transport and things, I have been travelling from Manchester to Liverpool since December last year and I can’t tell you the amount of overcrowding on those trains, and I just think I can’t believe these are two massive cities in the north—west two massive cities in the north-west and they are not two massive cities in the north—west and they are not well linked, and that means to change. Tonga I agree, the connections are not good enough. That is why we need to do that and invest. Whatever schemes, the ambition to connect up the cities of the north, including Liverpool to Manchester, absolutely. I would love Manchester, absolutely. Iwould love to see Manchester, absolutely. I would love to see that change, but it doesn’t seem to be happening. It doesn’t happen overnight, but you absolutely have to do it. I don’t want to go back over old ground, but the finances of the country were not in such a good state ten years ago, but now we ran such a good state ten years ago, but now we can invest in infrastructure. now we ran invest in infrastmclure. It’s bad, it’s got now we can invest in infrastructure. It’s bad, it’s got to get better, absolutely. Plan to look at what is your view, absolutely. Plan to look at what is yourview, Laurence your view, Laurence there have been your view, laurence there have been many news your view, Laurence there have been many news items about the state of the railways, but in terms of what the north can expect from a Conservative government? I am not a politician but I don’t at all resonate with what he said Liverpudlians being victims. I’ve worked here a couple of times and, like most cities in the north, you are so much nicer received by much nicer people than you ever bump into nicer peopla than you ever bump into in London nicer people than you ever bump into in London ever. APPLAUSE Alyn APPLAUSE Alyn. I think the question went to the character of Boris Alyn. I think the question went to the character of BorisJohnson. The the character of Boris johnson. The words printed the character of BorisJohnson. The words printed in his newspaper, which he refused to apologise for when Angela Eagle much more recently when Angela Eagla much more recently asked when Angela Eagle much more recently asked him when Angela Eagla much more recently asked him to, when Angela Eagle much more recently asked him to, were gratuitously offensive, and he dismisses it as banter. This is the man who said on the 31st October he’d rather die in a ditch and failed to deliver Brexit, and then he was a ditch and failed to deliver Brexit, and then he wasjust a ditch and failed to deliver Brexit, and then he was just having a laugh. My position of Boris johnson is a laugh. My position of Boris Johnson is that the Tories are led johnson is that the Tories are lad by somebody Johnson is that the Tories are led by somebody who I think is unfit for pub“: by somebody who I think is unfit for public office. And, worse than that, it’s because this is a man who will say anything and promise anything, and I think we need to say anything and promise anything, and I think we need tojudge this and I think we need to judge this government and I think we need tojudge this government by its deeds, and I think politicians of all stripes need to work together to do our best to mitigate what I think this government will do, because I think there is bad stuff coming down the line, not least coming through with Brexit. You have had your hand up for a long time, sir. If you are wondering about the cynicism, it’s because Liverpool was the hardest hit and it came to central funding cuts to local government, and it has devastated the city, in many respects, particularly those who are respects, particularty those who are most respects, particularly those who are most vulnerable. I will believe the good when I see it, simple as that. APPLAUSE Let’s have another question from Ian Stuart. Yes. Which Labour candidate, Stuart. Yes. which labour candidate, if any, do you Stuart. Yes. Which Labour candidate, if any, do you feel could reconnect with the lost voters in the north? I’m going to start with Madeline with the lost voters in the north? I’m going to start with Madeline. From what I’ve seen, I am not convinced any of them understand the stale convinced any of them understand the scale of the problem they are facing and the amount of trust that needs to be rebuilt in seats that, I think, for a long time many Labour think, for a long time many labour politicians took think, for a long time many Labour politicians took for granted and thought they could count on for ever, and they essentially own to these people and they belonged them. I mean, listening to even Lisa Mandy, who I I mean, listening to even Lisa Nandy, who I have a lot of respect Mandy, who I have a lot of respect for, and I Nandy, who I have a lot of respect for, and I think she is absolutely right when she said that, before doing gimmicky projects like HSZ, we could get the bloody bus routes are sorted, I think she’s right about that, but she is continuing to maintain the party’s exact line on the issue of free movement, despite the issue offree movement, despite the fact it the issue of free movement, despite the fact it is clear that a large proportion of the electorate, including in the red wall, proportion of the electorate, including in the red well, does not including in the red wall, does not share including in the red well, does not share that opinion. Meanwhile, you have Rebecca Long—Bailey, the air to have Rebeca Long-Bailey, the air to jeremy Corbyn, have Rebecca Long—Bailey, the air to Jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an interview Jeremy Corbyn, when asked in an interview will she thought he had performed as Labour leader, she said performed as labour leader, she said he was ten performed as Labour leader, she said he was ten out of ten, and you really wonder what you’d have to do to be eight in those circumstances. I don’t think they understand the stale I don’t think they understand the scale of the problem until they have that profound conversation with themselves as a party, and I don’t think they will get anywhere. APPLAUSE Shami APPLAUSE Shami, who do you back as the next labour Shami, who do you back as the next Labour leader? A gentleman earlier labour leader? A gentleman eartier said, she is Labour leader? A gentleman earlier said, she is an unelected baroness said, she is an unelacted baroness and she is said, she is an unelected baroness and she is entitled, and he’s got a and she is entitlad, and he’s got a point, and I am and she is entitled, and he’s got a point, and I am not entitled, which point, and lam not entitlad, which is why I don’t point, and I am not entitled, which is why I don’t think it’s my place to publicly declare for any one of these elected people. But we are so interested in what got to say! You were so close to the heart of the previous government. Sorry, the previous opposition. These are five "TY previous opposition. These are five very strong candidates. Could you narrow that down a bit? I will come back to the question on reconnecting people in the north, but I have decided I don’t think it’s appropriate for me to come out and, by the way, it would probably be the kiss of death for any one of the candidates if I did! In our rules, candidates if I did! In our mles, there is a candidates if I did! In our rules, there is a role for MP5 to declare... But that’s the heart of the question, in terms of reconnecting the lost voters of the north, what do you think comedy must have opinions, Labour needs to do to have opinions, labour needs to do to reconnect have opinions, Labour needs to do to reconnect with those photos? You have to start by listening and I know that all the candidates will be using this period to travel, just like Helen, they can get on the like Helen, they ran get on the train and like Helen, they can get on the train and they can come to Liverpool train and they ran come to Liverpool and they ran go train and they can come to Liverpool and they can go elsewhere and they and they ran go elsewhere and they do spend a lot and they can go elsewhere and they do spend a lot of time... And some of the candidates are from the north. Someone up there a scion, thinking, when the trains are mnning! thinking, when the trains are running! Forgive me, but thinking, when the trains are running! Forgive me, butl thinking, when the trains are running! Forgive me, but I really do mnning! Forgive me, butl really do think that. . . running! Forgive me, but I really do think that... And if Boris running! Forgive me, but I really do think that... And if BorisJohnson think that... And if Boris johnson is going to think that... And if BorisJohnson is going to steal some of our clothes and be a one—nation Conservative, he could consider renationalising the railways, actually, because I actually believe that is a very popular policy. that is a very popular policy. Let’s just get a microphone to you. They need to realise that Labour suffered need to realise that labour suffered their need to realise that Labour suffered their worst election result since 1935, and the arrogant and condescending attitude and no shift in ideas and manifestoes will cost you elections for decades to come. you elections for decades to come. I am actually trying very hard not to be arrogant, I don’t feel arrogant about that defeat, I really don’t, I feel... Your attitude tonight, and when you describe Boris feel... Your attitude tonight, and when you describe Borisjohnson, when you describe Boris johnson, peopla are when you describe Borisjohnson, people are entitled to their own peopla are entitiad to their own opinions, people are entitled to their own opinions, and people have their opinions, and peopla have their history, if we opinions, and people have their history, if we quoted what you believed in in 2004, or the SNP, you could be held to account. You need to listen to the electorate. The electorate did not get it wrong. Well, I electorate did not get it wrong. Well, lam electorate did not get it wrong. Well, I am a democrat... You didn’t! Forgive me, sir, but Well, I am a democrat... You didn’t! Forgive me, sir, butl Well, I am a democrat... You didn’t! Forgive me, sir, but I think I am entitled to Forgive me, sir, but I think I am entiﬂad to say Forgive me, sir, but I think I am entitled to say that Boris Forgive me, sir, but I think I am entitled to say that BorisJohnson’s entiﬂad to say that Boris johnson’s remarks entitled to say that BorisJohnson’s remarks about Liverpool, about Muslim, about black people, and it Muslim, about black peopla, and it goes on... APPLAUSE AND CHEERING. Forgive me. So, I think the candidates will all be listening, everybody was devastated by the result, I don’t think it was because of railway nationalisation, I believe that that was a very popular policy when I was knocking on doors. There are other issues. We were in a really difficult position on Brexit, our members and voters were split on Brexit. I know that our position of trying to bring these two sides together did not work. And it was a Brexit election. Of course it wasn’t Brexit elaction. Of course it wasn’t the only issue, I Brexit election. Of course it wasn’t the only issue, I do appreciate that, but it was a very, very big issue in the Brexit election and all the media were calling it the Brexit election and we didn’t manage to make it about other issues. But, of course, we lost, and we lost very badly, we have to listen, I believe all of the candidates will listen, and it will be for them, one of them, to lead us back to government. That sounded so plaintive. What am I That sounded so plaintive. what am I going to... ? That sounded so plaintive. what am I going to...? I That sounded so plaintive. what am I going to...? lam That sounded so plaintive. What am I going to...? I am either arrogant or I am going to...? I am either arrogant or Iam plaintive! No, going to...? I am either arrogant or lam plaintive! No, no, no, I’m not trying to give you a hard time, it just sounded so very melancholy. Can just sounded so very melancholy. (“an I just sounded so very melancholy. (“an Ijust just sounded so very melancholy. (“an I just say that just sounded so very melancholy. Can I just say that politics is a just sounded so very melancholy. Can Ijust say that politics is a tough I just say that politic is a tough sis I just say that politic is a tough gig and we Ijust say that politics is a tough gig and we are all here to represent all parties, we are not representative of everything all parties say and I think Shami deserves a lot of credit. I am neutral in the Labour Party neutral in the labour Party leadership neutral in the Labour Party leadership contest, I think you should ask a Scottish Labour Party should ask a Scottish labour Party politician, should ask a Scottish Labour Party politician, although to be far, there are not many of them around any there are not many of them around any. The point about reconnecting with the voters is absolutely right. The Labour Party in Scotland took The labour Party in Scotland took peopla for The Labour Party in Scotland took people for granted, and lost touch. peopla for granted, and lost touch. That is why my people for granted, and lost touch. That is why my party in the last election, where I was That is why my party in the last election, where I wasjust That is why my party in the last election, where I was just elected election, where I was just eluted into election, where I was just elected into Westminster, the Labour Party into Westminster, the labour Party only has one into Westminster, the Labour Party only has one seat in the whole of Scotland. That’s how quickly this stuff can change. In northern stuff ran change. In northern England, I stuff can change. In northern England, I studied at Leeds University, I know the north of England pretty well, you are the right end of England, after all, for me. And Liverpool, I right end of England, after all, for me. And Liverpool, lam basically at home. But a lot of people voted Tory home. But a lot of peopla voted Tory not home. But a lot of people voted Tory not because they wanted to vote Tory and voted in spite of Boris not because they wanted to vote Tory and voted in spite of Borisjohnson, and voted in spite of Boris johnson, but they voted and voted in spite of Borisjohnson, but they voted out of sheer frustration with the shambles that fmstration with the shambles that the frustration with the shambles that the Labour Party has become under the labour Party has become under jeremy Corbyn. the Labour Party has become under Jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of England and Jeremy Corbyn. As a friend of England and a progressive politician, I really want to see the labour Party politician, I really want to see the Labour Party get its act together. labour Party get its act together. I’ve got good Labour Party get its act together. I’ve got good friends in the Labour I’ve got good friends in the labour Party who I’ve got good friends in the Labour Party who having a really tough time, and this Labour Party election time, and this labour Party elaction is going to be time, and this Labour Party election is going to be really important and I really do hope they make the right choice. Half a million members, forgive me, and one of the biggest if not the biggest political movements in Western Europe is not quite a shambles, forgive me. I was being nice to you. Laurence, which labour being nice to you. Laurence, which Labour candidate do you believe labour candidate do you believe should Labour candidate do you believe should best represent the voters of the North? Keir Starmer? Why? He the North? Keir Starmer? why? He just looks like the North? Keir Starmer? Why? He just looks like he can take Boris on just looks like he ran take Boris on quite well, do just looks like he can take Boris on quite well, do you know what I mean? You don’t think any of the four women would be...? Oh, it’s not about women, jeepers, creepers. I am about women, jeepers, creepers. lam just interested in about women, jeepers, creepers. I am just interested in your view. Any woman... Because it’s really important what gender you are or sex you are rather than what your policies are and how you approach politic. I policies are and how you approach politics. I think what Shami said is politic. I think what Shami said is also part of politics. I think what Shami said is also part of the problem which is going on in the Labour Party, so going on in the labour Party, so many of the going on in the Labour Party, so many of the candidates have made reference to their identity, people are fed up with identity politics are fed up with identity politic but they are fed up with identity politics but they keep talking about how cmmmy but they keep talking about how crummy their school was, what their cmmmy their school was, what their gender is, at crummy their school was, what their gender is, et cetera, and even at the last general election, Jo Swinson made her gender the last general election, Jo Swinson made her genderfront and Swinson made her gender front and centre of Swinson made her genderfront and centre of the Lib Dems campaign and she even implied that the reason she was being restricted from the leadership debates wasn’t that it was in the obvious political interest of her opponents, but because they were obviously sexist. The berause they were obviously sexist. The public because they were obviously sexist. The public disagreed with that view. I think if they keep zoning in words on identity characteristics, what on identity characteristic, what happened on identity characteristics, what happened with Jeremy on identity characteristics, what happened withJeremy Corbyn, if you happened with jeremy Corbyn, if you look at happened withJeremy Corbyn, if you look at the polling, the public actually agrees with many key plaques of his policy platform but they didn’t vote for him because they did not think he was competent. I think they want a competent leader, it is that simple. Which leader, it is that simple. which labour leader, it is that simple. Which Labour leader would you least like labour leader would you least like to see? I Labour leader would you least like to see? I mean, it is up to Labour to see? I mean, it is up to labour to choose to see? I mean, it is up to Labour to choose their own leader and I do not want to say anything that would inﬂuence, not want to say anything that would influence, saying who I think is inﬂuence, saying who I think is best or influence, saying who I think is best or worst. I guess my overall view on what I would hope the future labour view on what I would hope the future Labour leader should do, and I think labour leader should do, and I think it is really Labour leader should do, and I think it is really important that we have a really strong opposition in the country, is, firstly, listen to peopla, country, is, firstly, listen to people, listen to people. Don’t be peopla, listen to peopla. Don’t be so ideological, people, listen to people. Don’t be so ideological, listen to people, realise that lots of people wanted Brexit, get that. Lots of people Brexit, get that. Lots of peopla don’t Brexit, get that. Lots of people don’t want higher taxes, appreciate people want to keep money in their pockets. People want opportunities, and stop talking Britain down and start talking Britain up. She’s do we have got very little time left but I want to get one question in that a fair but I want to get one question in that a fairfew but I want to get one question in that a fair few people wanted to ask that a fair few peopla wanted to ask about. Is that a fair few people wanted to ask about. Is it coincidental that after the worst figures of recent years regarding the four hour A&E waiting regarding the four hour AaE waiting targets has regarding the four hour A&E waiting targets has been published this week at the same time as the government is talking about scrapping the target? These are A&E waiting target? These are AaE waiting targets in target? These are A&E waiting targets in England, the worst figures on record. We haven’t got much time but I think it is important. The government is hinting at scrapping the four hour target. What at scrapping the four hour target. what is going at scrapping the four hour target. What is going to happen? I know it what is going to happen? I know it has been What is going to happen? I know it has been really tough in A&E in has been really tough in “IE in winter in has been really tough in A&E in winter in the NHS, tough for staff in the NHS, and as always, thank you to all the NHS staff who are sticking with it and working so hard. I think that the review of the waiting time target wasn’t suggested quite a while ago and I think it has been around, it is not suddenly now. I think there is a view overall on targets, and I have it from having worked in quite a few hospitals before I was an MP, that a box ticking target culture isn’t helpful. Accountability and transparency is important. 50, it is transparency is important. So, it is important to be transparency is important. 50, it is important to be measuring stuff and reporting on it and measuring it in the right way, but to do it in a way that is best for patients, is the “Y that is best for patients, is the way forward, not to do what seems to get the best headlines, but to do what is best for patients. Not because it is embarrassing for the government after ten years? No, it is not a sudden thing to be looking at the A&E target. I absolutely at the “IE target. I absolutely recognise at the A&E target. I absolutely recognise the pressures on the NHS, the important thing is that it is getting a really huge, record—breaking, increase in investment, £34 billion per year investment, 54 billion per year extra investment, £34 billion per year extra will investment, 54 billion per year extra will go investment, £34 billion per year extra will go into it. We’re going to have more nurses, more doctors, new hospitals, we are going to really invest in it and make use of having a strong economy to do that. The question is about English A&E The question is about English “IE figures, I The question is about English A&E figures, I would say that we are in charge of the NHS in Scotland and Scotland’s A&E has outperformed all countries of the UK in the last four years. The last time they hit the 95% years. The last time they hit the 9596 target years. The last time they hit the 95% target was in 2017. We have outperformed the other countries. So, not brilliantly but perhaps not quite as badly? There are lots of things we need to do better, absolutely. But the point I would be making is that I don’t trust the Tories on the NHS. Tories on the NHS. Shami, do you think the four hour target should be scrapped? Of course not, and for the reason that Helen gave, you want accountability and transparency, you don’t say we didn’t meet the target, we abolish the target country I was told, quite rightly, don’t talk Britain down. One of the best things about Britain, envied all over the world, has been the NHS. One of the best thing is that Labour ever did best thing is that labour ever did in its best thing is that Labour ever did in its 100—odd years. And I think in its 100-odd years. And I think that four in its 100—odd years. And I think that four ours is a very long time to be a sick person. Sometimes people have been queueing outside A&Fs in people have been queueing outside A&Es in the cold, in the winter, Aan in the cold, in the winter, that is A&Es in the cold, in the winter, that is completely unacceptable in one of the wealthiest countries on earth. And Helen, I urge you, please, don’t scrap the targets, don’t scrap the transparency and accountability and let’s get behind the NHS. I didn’t suggest for a moment that we should scrap transparency and accountability. Under a Conservative government, we have made huge strides, absolutely committed to transparency and accountability, but let’s do it in a “Y accountability, but let’s do it in a way that results in the best care way that results in the best rare for patients. way that results in the best care for patients. But today, all the practitioners have been crying out and saying otherwise, they have been saying how terrible it would be to scrap these targets. scrap these targets. Labour have scrap these targets. labour have planned to scrap these targets. Labour have planned to scrap Ofsted and other forms of target gathering in education, so forms of target gathering in education, sol forms of target gathering in education, so I think it goes both ways. But we heard about a winter crisis, travelling abroad, it is so rare to hear other countries in a perpetual winter crisis. This has been happening to the NHS for decades. I think we can and should decades. I think we ran and should spend much decades. I think we can and should spend much more on the NHS and I think funding is part of the solution. But I also think that given we are wedded to a highly centralised, top—down model which centralised, top-down model which has been centralised, top—down model which has been in place since centralised, top—down model which has been in place since1948, we has been in place since 1948, we should has been in place since1948, we should also take a look at best practice abroad. The dysfunctional American system isn’t... It is not the only game in town, we should look at what works in Europe, where they manage things very differently and they certainly are not living in perpetual winter crisis mode. Laurence? As somebody very close to me has just been Laurence? As somebody very close to me hasjust been in A&E, on the E me has just been in “IE, on the E end of it, and me hasjust been in A&E, on the E end of it, and they were treated straightaway, and absolutely wonderfully, so straightaway, and absolutely wonderfully, sol straightaway, and absolutely wonderfully, so I am very grateful for the NHS. Well, an accident can for the NHS. Well, an accident ran be an for the NHS. Well, an accident can be an emergency lamp or it can be, I be an emergency lamp or it ran be, I don’t know. Keep be an emergency lamp or it can be, I don’t know. Keep targets, why not. But I think the NHS when you really need them is incredible. I But I think the NHS when you really need them is incredible. Ijust wanted a quick follow—up to say that wanted a quick follow-up to say that you haven’t wanted a quick follow—up to say that you haven’t mentioned social care, you haven’t mentioned social rare, and the you haven’t mentioned social care, and the situation in A&E will never and the situation in “IE will never get better and the situation in A&E will never get better until you sort out social rare. And get better until you sort out social care. And there is no indication to rare. And there is no indication to rasuals care. And there is no indication to casuals that you have any plan, it rasuals that you have any plan, it is just a wish. casuals that you have any plan, it is just a wish. But you have got to do that. When are we going to see do that. when are we going to see something on do that. When are we going to see something on social care, Boris something on social rare, Boris johnson said something on social care, Boris Johnson said this year? He did johnson said this year? He did indeed say Johnson said this year? He did indeed say this year and you are absolutely right because when you’ve got people in hospital who are got peopla in hospital who are actually got people in hospital who are actually better being somewhere else, so that hospitals can treat else, so that hospitals ran treat people who else, so that hospitals can treat people who need to be in hospital, peopla who need to be in hospital, that people who need to be in hospital, that would be much better people who need to be in hospital, that would be much betterfor the that would be much better for the NHS and that would be much betterfor the NHS and much better that would be much betterfor the NHS and much betterfor the patient. NHS and much better for the patient. Its words, NHS and much betterfor the patient. Its words, though, isn’t it? Well, I mean, the point is that we need to... We had a consensus in the 19405 to... We had a consensus in the 1940s about a national commitment to 19405 about a national commitment to the NHS. We need to have that kind of consensus around a commitment on social rare. of consensus around a commitment on social care. And social care must be social rare. And social rare must be properly social rare. And social rare must be property funded social care. And social care must be properly funded and recognised, that property funded and recognised, that raring for properly funded and recognised, that caring for people is really, really raring for peopla is really, really important. caring for people is really, really important. 0K, we caring for people is really, really important. 0K, we could keep going, but our hour is up, I am so sorry, so many of you have got your hands up. Let me remind you, next week we are in Stoke Newington in North London and the following week we are in the Derbyshire Spa of Buxton. (“all us in the Derbyshire Spa of Buxton. Callus on... If you would like to (“all us on... If you would like to come along. Or Callus on... If you would like to come along. Or go to the Question Time website and follow the instructions. If you want to have your say on tonight’s topics, you your say on tonight’s topic, you ran join Adrian your say on tonight’s topics, you canjoin Adrian Chiles your say on tonight’s topics, you can join Adrian Chiles and guests on ran join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question can join Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time extra time, which is on Radio 5 Live right now. For now, thank you very much to the panel, and to the audience, and thank you to you at home for watching and listening. From Liverpool, goodbye.