Tonight we are in Weston—super—Mare. Tonight we are in Weston-super-Mare. Welcome Tonight we are in Weston—super—Mare. Welcome to Question Time. On the panel tonight, Matt Hancock, government Health Secretary, one of the key people involved in decision—making at the highest level decision-making at the highest level in this decision—making at the highest level in this coronavirus crisis. The labour Mayor in this coronavirus crisis. The Labour Mayor of Greater Manchester labour Mayor of Greater Manchester and Labour Mayor of Greater Manchester and former Health Secretary under Gordon Brown during the swine flu Gordon Brown during the swine ﬂu aPP- Gordon Brown during the swine ﬂu app, Andy Gordon Brown during the swine flu app, Andy Burnham projects Tom Solomon, Doctor app, Andy Burnham projects Tom Solomon, Doctorand app, Andy Burnham projects Tom Solomon, Doctor and director of the UK’s emerging infections research unit at Liverpool University put it Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the trained union in conquest, the TUC put and Michelin starred chef, TV presenter and owner of several restaurants, Angela Hartnett -- trades several restaurants, Angela Hartnett —— trades union conquest. We are -- trades union conquest. We are doing a very —— trades union conquest. We are doing a very different programme on Question Time for obvious reasons, for the first time in our history there is no studio audience but we will be hearing from the people of Weston—super—Mare who have kindly Weston-super-Mare who have kindly recorded Weston—super—Mare who have kindly recorded some questions for us and we will play them via video link. As we are live, we also want to hear from you. Contact us in the usual “Y from you. Contact us in the usual way on Twitter and social media, @BBCQuestionTime, and I will feed in OBBCOuestionTime, and I will feed in as many @BBCQuestionTime, and I will feed in as many questions as I can to our as many questions as I ran to our panel, suitably as many questions as I can to our panel, suitably distanced, as we go through. Let hit our first question which is from a local doctor through. Let hit our first question which is from a local doctorJess which is from a [oral doctorjess Elliott. Hi, my which is from a local doctorJess Elliott. Hi, my name is which is from a local doctorJess Elliott. Hi, my name isJess Elliott Elliott. Hi, my name is jess Elliott and I’m a junior Elliott. Hi, my name isJess Elliott and I’m a junior doctor working in Weston—super—Mare. The situation Weston-super-Mare. The situation with the Weston—super—Mare. The situation with the coronavirus is a worrying time for us all. Not least as working in what are unprecedented circumstances for the health service. Many circumstances for the health service. Manyjunior doctors are frightened that we will be in the same position as Italy in a few weeks with the coronavirus pandemic. How are you going to ration ventilators and other vital equipment for patients and protective equipment for staff when the NHS becomes overwhelmed? Matt, since we have you here, let’s start with that, an issue about ventilators as well as protective equipment. There does not appear to be enough but what is being done? This is incredibly important. The front line staff of the NHS to an amazing job all the time but in the coming weeks, they will be called on for a heroic effort. coming weeks, they will be called on for a heroic effort. I know that there are concerns on the front line around making sure that the protective equipment keeps coming. I ran tell you protective equipment keeps coming. I can tell you that over the last 2A ran tell you that over the last 24 hours we can tell you that over the last 2A hours we have shipped 2.6 million masks, 10,000 bottles of hand sanitiser, and we have a growing effort to get that equipment to the front line. That is a huge government effort that is going on as we speak and even right through the night we will be getting that protective equipment output at somebody like protective equipment output at somebody likeJess, and other somebody like jess, and other doctors somebody likejess, and other doctors around the UK, . When can they expect to have that . when ran they expect to have that equipment? . When can they expect to have that equipment? Overnight we will get 150 hospitals the next pack of eight protective equipment they need to point out we have this in storage in use point out we have this in storage in rase there point out we have this in storage in case there is a pandemic like this rase there is a pandemic like this and there case there is a pandemic like this and there are lorries on the roads right now. Some hospitals will get it overnight tonight and the rest will get their next load before the end of the weekend. Everything 3 end of the weekend. Everything a hospital will end of the weekend. Everything 3 hospital will get their next batch protective equipment before Sunday night. Some of the hospitals that have been running a particularly have been mnning a particularty short in have been running a particularly short in the last 48 hours, we have got it to them already. It is a massive effort from the NHS, that sunplv massive effort from the NHS, that supply chain and others to make sure that happens. And Jess also asked that happens. And jess also asked about that happens. And Jess also asked about ventilators which are particularly important because of particularty important because of the particularly important because of the nature of coronavirus and we learned from what happened in Italy that they are critical. We have increased the capacity for ventilators in the NHS already and we have this call—out, we put the we have this fall-out, we put the cork out at we have this call—out, we put the cork out at the weekend for people to make more of them because although we are buying them at the moment, we will clearly need more. moment, we will dearty need more. We have moment, we will clearly need more. We have had an amazing response to that, at 1400 We have had an amazing response to that, at M00 companies have come that, at 1400 companies have come forward that, at M00 companies have come forward and said they can turn that forward and said they ran turn that manufacturing forward and said they can turn that manufacturing capability to make ventilators. The next thing we need to do is train people to use them because a ventilator without a trained operator can be dangerous trained operator ran be dangerous especially trained operator can be dangerous especially the invasive ones for the more serious cases, so we are more serious rases, so we are training NHS more serious cases, so we are training NHS doctors who are currently doing other things, specialists in other things, for instance hip and knee operations, training them to be able to put the ventilators in a case the numbers ventilators in a rase the numbers really get that ventilators in a case the numbers really get that high. And can I ask, really get that high. And ran I ask, because really get that high. And can I ask, because it is 25 new countries dubbing because it is 25 new countries clubbing together to buy ventilators dubbing together to buy ventilators in order clubbing together to buy ventilators in order to bulk buy them, the UK at the moment is not part of that but will we be? We are invited to be part of that. We are invited but we are not taking part at the moment. We engaged with that process today. We are not clear actually how much, how many more ventilators we will get through that process so frankly we are getting on with it and buying them from around the world, from the UK producers and turning other companies... Formula 1 have said they will get their factories that normally create cars and work with their brilliant engineers to create ventilators. The truth is, Fiona, this will be a national effort and we have to turn the whole resources of the country to how to best stop the growth of the virus, and grow the NHS capacity to deal with it. Tom, what is your response to what jess said and Tom, what is your response to what Jess said and what Matt has said? Tom, what is your response to what Jess said and what Matt has said? I jess said and what Matt has said? I think the Jess said and what Matt has said? I think the important thing, ventilators are very important and there are plans to make more as we heard about. It may be that we have to be a bit heard about. It may be that we have to be a bit innovative and creative given the nature of this emergency which we are facing and I have worked in parts of the world like Southeast Asia and Africa where there are ventilators which are made of different spec and work in a different way. It may be that we will use ventilators of that sort so we ran will use ventilators of that sort so we can use more quickly and evenly we ran use more quickly and evenly ran a data -- we can use more quickly and evenly can a data —— in Canada they’re ran a data -- in Canada therre talking about can a data —— in Canada they’re talking about ventilators instead of one Subotic restoration for one person, you can support several person, you ran support several people come person, you can support several people come up to nine people, as peopla come up to nine peopla, as long as they people come up to nine people, as long as they have a similar need in terms of support point of view feel confident we will have enough? ﬂ I feel the numbers are going Ifeel the numbers are going up dramatically but also the number of patients are going up. m: We are in uncertain territory and eight race is on but I’m confident we are doing everything we can to we are doing everything we ran to produce we are doing everything we can to produce enough ventilators in time. In Liverpool where I work, I came from the hospital this morning and at the moment we have two ventilated patients but capacity for about 20. Depending on where you are in the country, clearly in London the country, dearty in London the strain is country, clearly in London the strain is greater and that is where the need for new ventilators will be first. Let me ask you a response, we have heard so many doctors saying they don’t feel they have enough equipment and they’re putting their equipment and therre putting their own equipment and they’re putting their own lives at risk,. equipment and they’re putting their own lives at risk,. You have got to feel for jess and own lives at risk,. You have got to feel forJess and her colleagues feel for jess and her colleagues right now feel forJess and her colleagues right now but I remember hearing it in 2009 when I was dealing with swine flu. Know when they in 2009 when I was dealing with swine flu. Know when they rate —— swine ﬂu. Know when they rate -- nowhere swine flu. Know when they rate —— nowhere near as serious as this but nonetheless serious so I know how hard it is to be Matt right now. It’s a difficult position and we all have an interest in him succeeding so nothing I say will be point scoring, I would give my perspective in terms of where we are. I was hearing today that staff are reusing protective masks in hospitals at the moment. I was glad to hear that lorries are on the road tonight but that is quite urgent and it should not be the case that any person in not be the use that any person in jess’s petition not be the case that any person in Jess’s petition should be using jess’s petition should be using crucial Jess’s petition should be using crucial equipment. Hopefully that will be put right in the NHS but there is a social care —— in her there is a social rare -- in her position. Social there is a social care —— in her position. Social care also need that position. Social rare also need that equipment position. Social care also need that equipment and that is the next priority. On capacity, I remember in 2009 agonising about it, how we could get more equipment income if we could open more intensive care we could open more intensive rare beds and we could open more intensive care beds and went to the same thing. I hear what the Secretary of State is saying about Formula 1 and manufacturing capability. I would say to go a bit more route one, to the private health care industry the private health rare industry pundit the private health care industry pundit there are beds and facilities in private medicine in your emergency bill, I would say to take power to take over that capacity. That surely has to be the first thing you would do if there was a crucial shortage. We should not be thinking about rationing. We should be using every power at our disposal to get health capacity available to the public as well as thinking about the man puncturing solutions that might be out there. Frances, what is your view on that? might be out there. Frances, what is your view on that? First of all, it’s important to pay tribute to peopla like it’s important to pay tribute to people like Jess it’s important to pay tribute to people likeJess who are dedicated professionals and doing an incredible professionals and doing an incrediblejob in professionals and doing an incredible job in difficult circumstances. incredible job in difficult circumstances. As the TUC and unions, we represent staff in the health service. Of course we are not just talking about doctors and nurses. It is really important to remember we are talking about cleaners and porters and all the other support staff because without them, our hospitals cannot function. them, our hospitals rannot function. What them, our hospitals rannot function. what we them, our hospitals cannot function. What we are hearing is exactly as what we are hearing is exactly as jess is saying, What we are hearing is exactly as Jess is saying, people need masks, jess is saying, peopla need masks, soap, Jess is saying, people need masks, soap, equipment to fight this pandemic. They are telling you they don’t have enough soap? We have had that. You have to remember that this is a team. People see themselves as a team in the NHS and they know that they depend on each other in order to do the job they have to do. There are real worries and they need to get that sorted fast. And I am also really interested in the ventilators point. It is fantastic if we have manufacturing companies prepared to switch production. Our unions representing manufacturing workers want to do that representing manufacturing workers want to do thatjob but let’s be want to do that job but let’s be straight with want to do thatjob but let’s be straight with people. It is often straight with peopla. It is often not as straight with people. It is often not as simple as it sometimes is portrayed put it switching manufacturing, getting parts, sometimes from China not always easy. Let’s tell people the truth. easy. Let’s tell peopla the truth. We are easy. Let’s tell people the truth. We are grown—ups and we can take it. We are grown-ups and we ran take it. We want to We are grown—ups and we can take it. We want to know how long this will take and, in the meantime, how do we get that international cooperation so we get the ventilators to where they need to be most? And that takes cooperation not point scoring between nations but helping each other and I could not agree more with Andy. If we are going to pull together as a nation, those private health care companies need to pull health rare companies need to pull their weight. health care companies need to pull their weight. We have had a message already from Rhiannon their weight. We have had a message already from RhiannonJackson. When already from Rhiannon jackson. when ran we expect already from Rhiannonjackson. When can we expect to see protective ran we expect to see protective equipment can we expect to see protective equipment being delivered to social rare equipment being delivered to social care providers? Without it, the disabled and elderly will not get disablad and elderty will not get the disabled and elderly will not get the care they rely on in the the rare they rely on in the community the care they rely on in the community or residential setting is our workforce gets ill or worse, transfers the virus thus putting more pressure on the NHS. You have talked about when you hope NHS work will have it but what about social rare? will have it but what about social care? That is happening as we speak. rare? That is happening as we speak. Every one of the care? That is happening as we speak. Every one of the 25,000 different places where people are either in social rare, places where people are either in social care, in a care home, or social rare, in a rare home, or providers, those social care, in a care home, or providers, those who go out to people’s homes, every single one of those providers will get a package of personal protective equipment. And then we will make sure that more keeps coming according to the scale of the operation. It’s a very complicated logistical effort, especially with the social care especially with the social rare providers especially with the social care providers because there are so many. Some are very small care homes, up Some are very small rare homes, up to the biggest Some are very small care homes, up to the biggest with a lot of homes. And they rare to the biggest with a lot of homes. And they care for lots of people in And they rare for lots of peopla in their own And they care for lots of people in their own home. Social care is their own home. Social rare is absolutely their own home. Social care is absolutely getting the protective equipment. When you anticipate they equipment. when you anticipate they will get that equipment. When you anticipate they will get that and when will it be resolved? It is being resolved right now and I would have thought that by the end of next week every social rare provider the end of next week every social care provider will have that, that rare provider will have that, that is the goal but care provider will have that, that is the goal but there was a broader point. Often we talk about the NHS and especially in political debate is about the NHS. Really, the NHS and social care together is and social rare together is critical, and social care together is critical, especially because of this virus is more dangerous for older peopla and we virus is more dangerous for older people and we have got to look at peopla and we have got to look at the people and we have got to look at the whole team. I know you want to the whola team. I know you want to come in but the whole team. I know you want to come in but Angela, you run many businesses and we will come onto business but what you think hearing this? You are someone who has concerns about getting the infection yourself or your workers? concerns about getting the infection yourself or your workers? Just yourself or your workers? just talking to yourself or your workers? Just talking to people today before I talking to peopla today before I fame talking to peopla today before I name on, talking to people today before I came on, obviously this is not my norm but I think what Frances said, facts norm but I think what Frances said, facts and accurate facts is what the government needs to give us on every level. If government needs to give us on every level. IfI government needs to give us on every level. If I was running a care home, lavel. If I was mnning a rare home, I would like level. If I was running a care home, I would like to know from the government when is it arriving a. Saying overnight next week, if I’m absolutely honest, isn’t good enough. I want to know it arriving in the next 2A hours or on Thursday. in the next 24 hours or on Thursday. To bring it to a in the next 2A hours or on Thursday. To bring it to a personal thing, when we are in a crisis like we are, we all think about ourselves because we are naturally slightly selfish. Might cousin’s mother is in a care Might cousin’s mother is in a rare home, they Might cousin’s mother is in a care home, they have coronavirus incidents and at home and she’s over 80. She’s absolutely petrified, as many people are. When is that care many peopla are. when is that rare home going to many people are. When is that care home going to get all the equipment it needs to protect the elderly? I it needs to protect the elderty? I think it needs to protect the elderly? I think probably they are the most vulnerable people in society at the moment. We need the facts to know when all this is happening. And I’m saying it in a laissez faire attitude but the more information and accurate information the public gets, we are so nervous now, it will calm people down. I think what is calm peopla down. I think what is totally true, calm people down. I think what is totally true, we are trying to be as transparent as possible, including about the risks. As well as about what we’re doing about. Let me put another question in. I will try to get as many questions as I can in get as many questions as I ran in giving it the get as many questions as I can in giving it the audience is virtual! From Louisa. "When will front line From Louisa. "when will front line NHS staff he tested in England? They are already being tested in Wales and Scotland but not come pensively in England, particularly those in England, particularty those having to in England, particularly those having to isolate due to illness. My husband is stuck at home due to possibla husband is stuck at home due to possible coronavirus symptoms which possibla coronavirus symptoms which could be possible coronavirus symptoms which could he flew, he could return to could be ﬂaw, he could return to work soon could he flew, he could return to work soon if he knew but he cannot afford the private test." We have heard of the World Health Organization take test, test, test so what is your view on this question is enough being done? ﬂ I think it is critical to test NHS workers. It is critical to test everyone if we can and the number of everyone if we ran and the number of tests everyone if we can and the number of tests available are going up, so it is these two curves. At the moment, the number of cases is greater than the number of rases is greater than our ability to the number of cases is greater than our ability to test but the testing ability is ramping up and we want the testing ability to overtake the number of cases. Given that we cannot test everyone at the moment, rannot test everyone at the moment, the priority has cannot test everyone at the moment, the priority has to be first of all the patients, and that is happening now, and the second priority I think has to be health care workers has to be health rare workers because, has to be health care workers because, at the moment, if somebody, you know, if because, at the moment, if somebody, you know, ifI have because, at the moment, if somebody, you know, if I have a cough, then I you know, ifI have a cough, then I had to you know, if I have a cough, then I had to isolate myself at home for seven days and then I will be going back to work and we won’t know whether I had coronavirus or not. I might then have another cop a week later and I would have to go for seven days. Do you think we should have started testing sooner? I think we started testing incredibly quickly. The minute the Chinese released the information about the genetic information of this virus, genetic information of this vims, Pub“: genetic information of this virus, Public Health England created a test as soon as they possibly could and then the issue is about scaling back test up. You know, when we had five, ten cases in test up. You know, when we had five, ten cases inJanuary, then I think ten cases in january, then I think if somebody ten cases inJanuary, then I think if somebody had said you need to make hundreds of thousands of tests, that would have seemed on sensible, because you just don’t know at the start of an outbreak. I know you are a specialist in infectious diseases, but I am not an expert... It seems to me that planning for a pandemic is something our authority should have been doing and expect to do because it is the scale of the issue and, let’s be honest about this, health staff and indeed staff in social care are putting their health social rare are putting their health on the social care are putting their health on the line for us, and it seems to me that the least they deserve is to get tests and, also, because that’s the best way we can deliver the the best way we ran deliver the service, so the best way we can deliver the service, so that we can get people service, so that we ran get people back to service, so that we can get people back to work quickly. I would agree with that. As we’ve heard, we now have a Department of Health and social rare, have a Department of Health and social care, this is one team of social rare, this is one team of workers social care, this is one team of workers and testing, I think, of key workers goes across the board. I couldn’t agree more. I chaired the first meeting yesterday of the way to Manchester Covid—19 committee and to Manchester Covid-19 committee and I put the all out to Manchester Covid—19 committee and I put the call out before I went I put the all out before I went about I put the call out before I went about what are the issues you think are not getting the special attention that need to be put up the priority list and testing of NHS and social care staff was the issue that social rare staff was the issue that fame social care staff was the issue that came back. NHS staff clearly don’t came back. NHS staff dearty don’t think it is came back. NHS staff clearly don’t think it is happening fast enough, they are tweeting, they are putting things in the paper. This is an area we focused on a lot in 2009. And I know it was part of the pandemic plan, but when there was this feeling of we are going for a more herd immunity approach, may I was taken off the ball up testing a little more, I don’t know. Matt may say something different. What I say something different. what I heard say something different. What I heard today from a very senior manager in the National Health Service is there is a lot of scepticism in the system about 25,000 tests per day and I would like to hear 25,000 tests per day and I would like to hearfrom 25,000 tests per day and I would like to hear from the Secretary of State about when that would be delivered, because people are saying they cannot see how that can be delivered anytime soon, because it requires standing down the screening capacity and freeing up lab capacity in other parts of the NHS and people in other parts of the NHS and peopla are stmggling in other parts of the NHS and people are struggling to see when it comes are stmggling to see when it comes through. That is are struggling to see when it comes through. That is a key issue. Like the masks, people want to know the masks, peopla want to know exactly when the masks, people want to know exactly when they will this reassurance. So when will we see the 25,000 tests? I have been buying test today, that is what I have been spending most of my day on. Tom is absolutely right, Public Health England came out with the first test on this within days of the viral code being made public and then we have been increasing test capacity all the time since then. We have hit a 10000 and we hit that target sooner than we anticipated and the problem is that, as the virus, as the number of people increases on an exponential curve, the number of tests is going up in a linear direction and we have got good news, though, which is that, from today, we have been able to buy a new type of test which is, instead of finding out, having to take the swab, send it to a lab and get it back, which is taking quite a lot of time and anyone who has had a test knows it takes a couple of days at best, the new type of test allows you to, it is more like a pregnancy test, you ran take it is more like a pregnancy test, you can take it immediately, it is blood ran take it immediately, it is blood prick. This is to can take it immediately, it is blood prick. This is to check if you have had coronavirus? If you have had it and are immune and have the antibodies. Does that definitely work and is it definitely going to into production? Will we see that? into production? will we see that? That is in into production? Will we see that? That is in production and we have been buying that today for the first time. It only got approved in the last few days. That is clearly a brilliant step forward and to be welcomed but it is a different type of test. What Andy is asking you is of test. what Andy is asking you is the 25,000 of test. What Andy is asking you is the 25,000 tests per day, when is that going to happen? That is going to happen in the next couple of weeks. We are going as fast as we ran but weeks. We are going as fast as we can but we are also, on the test for ran but we are also, on the test for whether you can but we are also, on the test for whether you have the coronavirus, whether you have the coronavims, which is whether you have the coronavirus, which is different from the test of whether you have had coronavirus, whether you have had coronavims, the test whether you have had coronavirus, the test of whether you have it now, we are also working with some of the leading companies in the field radically to increase the number of those tests. Because I totally agree with the world of their health —— with the world of their health -- the head with the world of their health —— the head of the World Health Organisation, the way that we can understand what is happening, who has got coronavirus and who has had it and both treat people better but also slow the spread is the combination of understanding who has got it through the testing, who has got it and ran got it through the testing, who has got it and can go back to work and got it and ran go back to work and it is only the got it and can go back to work and it is only the combination of technology and testing where we can technology and testing where we ran get a grip on technology and testing where we can get a grip on this curve and, hopefully, in time, reduce some of the incredibly Draconian measures that we’ve had to take this week. 0K, that we’ve had to take this week. OK, I’m going to take a slightly different tack on a subject for a moment, I want to hear different tack on a subject for a moment, I want to hearfrom another moment, I want to hear from another of our peopla moment, I want to hearfrom another of our people from Weston—super—Mare. Nigel, who owns of our peopla from Weston-super-Mare. Nigel, who owns a shop making Weston—super—Mare. Nigel, who owns a shop making blinds in the area. As a small business owner who employs nine people, I am concerned about the future of the business. There are many services such as ours where workers -- are many services such as ours where workers —— work is in the customer’s workers -- work is in the customer home. with workers —— work is in the customer’s home. With increased self isolation, home. with increased self isolation, we will home. With increased self isolation, we will be able to complete existing contracts for some time and unable contracts for some time and unabla to plan future contracts for some time and unable to plan future work. This means cash to plan future work. This means rash ﬂow is poor, my to plan future work. This means cash flow is poor, my business interruption insurance doesn’t seem to cover me and yet my moral obligation is to pay my staff and maintain my business. However the Government proposing to help companies like mine? —— how are. One companies like mine? -- how are. One month’s payroll companies like mine? —— how are. One month’s payroll would exceed £10,000 grant. That is Nigel from Weston—super—Mare. Angela, as an Weston-super-Mare. Angela, as an owner of Weston—super—Mare. Angela, as an owner of restaurants, this is something you have to deal with, so what have you been saying to your workers? We, unfortunately, along with many fellow restaurateurs, and I ran only with many fellow restaurateurs, and I can only speak for London, with many fellow restaurateurs, and I can only speakfor London, we have I ran only speak for London, we have closed, we I can only speakfor London, we have closed, we have shot our restaurants dosed, we have shot our restaurants last night, it is closed, we have shot our restaurants last night, it is four restaurants I have, 140 people approximately that have, 140 peopla approximately that we have have, 140 people approximately that we have asked to go on to unpaid leave. Some may want redundancy. I have done it for a few reasons. One, as I said before, it is the information coming from the Government. So many flying rumours Government. So many ﬂying mmours around Government. 50 many flying rumours around that London is on lockdown, is it not? I employ European staff, so I wanted the opportunity for them to go home. When the Prime Minister to go home. when the Prime Minister stood up on the to go home. When the Prime Minister stood up on the Tuesday press briefing and said don’t go to clubs, bars, restaurants, that decimated our business. 70, 80% of the our business. 70, 8096 of the bookings our business. 70, 80% of the bookings were knocked off. And what are your employees saying to you and what have you said to them in terms of future employment? We are in offuture employment? We are in daily contact, of future employment? We are in daily contact, e—mailing over what daily contact, e-mailing over what is happening. daily contact, e—mailing over what is happening. We are waiting, we need initiatives from the Government. Fantastic that the Chancellor gave us these billions and billions of pounds. What we need and billions of pounds. what we need now, if you like, and billions of pounds. What we need now, if you like, the laws or however the Government does it to 55V however the Government does it to say landlords give us a free three month rent period. Yes, I’m going to pay every single person in the hospitality sector £1000 a week or a month to sustain, cover their rent period. These people are on low incomes. It was bad enough when we were treated as an industry where we were called unskilled Labour and unskilled workers. These people have to pay their rent, they have families to support, bills to pay. And our industry, we are the third biggest employer in the country and the knock—on effect, this gentleman the knock-on effect, this gentleman included, we the knock—on effect, this gentleman included, we buy blinds for restaurants. It is not included, we buy blinds for restaurants. It is notjust the restaurants. It is not just the home. restaurants. It is notjust the home. And what about the loan is the Government have suggested, is that any use? I think it will be but, again, it is how we access them. We need to know the banks will actually back-up need to know the banks will actually back—up these loans, we have two back-up these loans, we have two different back—up these loans, we have two different banks and they don’t seem dear different banks and they don’t seem clear how they are going to work so, again, information. And, two, it is that double edged sword. We have closed restaurants because we felt dosed restaurants berause we felt it was closed restaurants because we felt it was best for staff, customers, health and safety but there is no income coming through and we will struggle when we open up. So when we open up, there will be a cash flow open up, there will be a rash ﬂow issue and open up, there will be a cash flow issue and we won’t have customers like that so do I get into a loan of half a million, like that so do I get into a loan of halfa million, £1 million? like that so do I get into a loan of half a million, £1 million? These halfa million, £1 million? These are the half a million, £1 million? These are the questions we need to know. Or if I take the loan, do I have two Orifltaketheloan, dolhavetwo years Orifltaketheloan,dolhavetwo yearsto Orifltaketheloan,dolhavetwo yearstopay Orifltaketheloan,dolhavetwo yearstopayit Or if I take the loan, do I have two years to pay it back? Then I can years to pay it back? Then I ran seriously say, years to pay it back? Then I can seriously say, fantastic, I can pay seriously say, fantastic, I ran pay my staff for seriously say, fantastic, I can pay my staff for three months because I know I have that period. Lots of questions to answer and we need the information and the feeling is it will be coming out, but at 5pm, I am glued to that TV, what is the Chancellor going to give us? You and lots of peoplo. Chancellor going to give us? You and lots of people. Frances, this is lots of peopla. Frances, this is something lots of people. Frances, this is something you are hearing a lot, too. Yes, small businesses, even in my [oral too. Yes, small businesses, even in my local community, I too. Yes, small businesses, even in my local community, Ijust get too. Yes, small businesses, even in my local community, I just get that my [oral community, Ijust get that sense of a my local community, I just get that sense of a real need for certainty and detail, because many of those sense of a real need for certainty and detail, because many of those sense of a real need for certainty and detail, because many of those sense of a real need for certainty and detail, because many of those announcements are welcome, cash flow announcements are welcome, rash ﬂow is a real problem announcements are welcome, cash flow is a real problem but if you are living on the edge, then you’ve got to take decisions so you need to be able to access it quickly and, of course, the staff, what happens to them? Are they straight on to benefits, is that it? Because a lot of peopla are benefits, is that it? Because a lot of people are going to struggle. And of peopla are going to stmggle. And not just a of people are going to struggle. And notjust a small business owners, not just a small business owners, millions notjust a small business owners, millions of self—employed people, millions of self-employed peopla, some millions of self—employed people, some of them, in our view, not genuinely self—employed, some of genuinely self-employed, some of them put genuinely self—employed, some of them put onto bogus self—employment them put onto bogus self-employment contracts them put onto bogus self—employment contracts precisely to avoid paying their basic rights like sick pay. But the idea that they can survive But the idea that they ran survive for a But the idea that they can survive for a sustained period on benefits is a real problem. But, you know, this is an argument we are making more broadly in terms of workers. How do we make sure that we don’t just bail How do we make sure that we don’t just bailout How do we make sure that we don’t just bail out the boardrooms? We got just bailout the boardrooms? We got to bail just bailout the boardrooms? We got to bailout just bail out the boardrooms? We got to bail out workers, they got food to put on the table, children to raise, and statutory sick pay, £91; a raise, and statutory sick pay, £94 a week, it is not raise, and statutory sick pay, £91; a week, it is not enough. Matt, I think you would be the first on to 55V think you would be the first on to say that you couldn’t live on that. I don’t think any of us could. Could you? No. But you expect others to? No, I you? No. But you expect others to? No, Ithink you? No. But you expect others to? No, I think we have got to support everybody and support both businesses everybody and support both businesses everybody and support both businesses to help support their staff, we want businesses to support their staff because the best staff, we want businesses to support their staff because the best thing is if people stay in employment. You is if peoplo stay in employment. You know, this is a is if people stay in employment. You know, this is a once in a century event... But we know that. We know all that, but we had the Prime Minister saying today, businesses, keep your employees on, support them, because we are going to support you but you’ve got Angela here saying I don’t know what is going to happen. I was coming on to that. This is a once in a century event and it means that the whole resources of the country have got to be turned on how best we get through this as a country. You know, it is because we are all humans that we are all susceptible to the virus, so we need to all come together to support each other through it and that, of course, the only organisation, the only organisation that is big enough to do that in a calamity of this scale is the Government, so absolutely we are going to come to the aid of businesses as fast as we possibly ran, so that businesses as fast as we possibly can, so that businesses can keep ran, so that businesses ran keep their can, so that businesses can keep their staff on, so that you are there... Angela has already let hers go. No, she has actually kept them on, although unpaid for now, so we need to come to Angela’s aid, because, when this is over, I want Angela able to open her restaurants again. And we have got to look after peopla, we’ve again. And we have got to look after people, we’ve got to look after businesses, as well as fight the disease and we got to use the whole resources of the state to do this. I have sympathy with what Matty saying because if I look back at our experience, we had an economic crash in 2008 and then a health crisis in 2009, and now this Government has got them together, so I absolutely do have a lot of sympathy with what being said. However, here is the criticism, or the challenge. The Government has taken a lot of measures this week that have sounded good but never, not quite given all the answers that people like Angela the answers that peopla like Angela are looking the answers that people like Angela are looking for. But the problem is the Government has done the least for the people who need help the most, and I am talking about people most, and I am talking about peopla in low paid, most, and I am talking about people in low paid, insecure employment, peopla who in low paid, insecure employment, people who are self—employed, people peopla who are self-employed, peopla who are people who are self—employed, people who are on benefits already or out of work and the problem, the reason it is a problem for the Government, is that those people can’t follow is that those peopla ran’t follow the is that those people can’t follow the Government’s advice to self—isolate, they have to go into self-isolate, they have to go into work and self—isolate, they have to go into work and some of them work in social rare. And work and some of them work in social care. And that is not a good thing. rare. And that is not a good thing. So they should care. And that is not a good thing. So they should have been the first EWUP- So they should have been the first group, I would say, to be helped, not the last and the Government really needs to address this. It is rash really needs to address this. It is cash flow for businesses, let be —— rash ﬂow for businesses, let be -- maybe really cash flow for businesses, let be —— maybe really clear about that. The Chamber of Commerce for Greater Manchester wanted me to make that point, the businesses need money, they needed today but it will have to be tomorrow but it should come with the condition that the money is used to pay staff and keep them on. Gordon Brown was making this point incredibly powerfully on the radio incredibly powerfuuy on the radio today, incredibly powerfully on the radio today, because if we keep a like Angela’s a today, because if we keep a like Angela’s afloat today, because if we keep a like Angela’s a float and we keep staff Angela’s a ﬂoat and we keep staff in position, Angela’s a float and we keep staff in position, this is the crucial point, it will help people know to point, it will help peopla know to do the right point, it will help people know to do the right thing and follow the Government’s advice. But, crucially, it will make the recovery easier after all this is over because we will have businesses that are there, staff that are there, ready to go and the Government needs to act on this tomorrow. It needs to increase statutory sick pay, as you just acknowledge yourself. It needs to remove the restrictions on jobseeker’s allowance, increase Universal Credit, guarantee people’s wages with a Government contribution to those wages, help self—employed to those wages, help self-employed peopla more to those wages, help self—employed people more than saying apply for Universal Credit. It needs to do all of these things tomorrow because that is going to help us in the long term recover that is going to help us in the long term recoverfrom that is going to help us in the long term recover from this, that is going to help us in the long term recoverfrom this, not that is going to help us in the long term recoverfrom this, notjust that is going to help us in the long term recover from this, notjust a term recover from this, not just a health term recover from this, notjust a health crisis but the economic crisis as well. Let’s just hear quickly from Caitlin, who works in a pub here in Weston—super—Mare. I’v e I’ve been working on a local pub and I’ve been working on a [oral pub and a I’ve been working on a local pub and a zero—hours contract but was a zero-hours contract but was guaranteed a a zero—hours contract but was guaranteed a shift from week to week but since the advice from the Prime Minister to stop visiting places like pubs are the custom has dried “P like pubs are the custom has dried up and so have our ships. I’m lucky enough to not have any bills to pay and no one to depend on the. But there are many who I know have children to feed and rent to pay who will struggle in the coming weeks. What does the government intend to what does the government intend to do to help What does the government intend to do to help these people? And I’m getting a lot of messages about that. I know you are Health Secretary and we expect to hear from the Chancellor tomorrow. But what ran you tell us the Chancellor tomorrow. But what can you tell us tonight live with a ran you tell us tonight live with a lot of peopla can you tell us tonight live with a lot of people are listening in terms lot of peopla are listening in terms of lot of people are listening in terms of the points that Caitlin has made, Nigel Nate and Andy made about what is coming tomorrow? I’d wholeheartedly agree with the arguments being put and we are going to deliver on that. The first people to deliver on that. The first peopla who to deliver on that. The first people who we’ve changed the rules to help who we’ve changed the mles to help within who we’ve changed the rules to help within the budget, ten days ago, feels like a lifetime ago, to make sure that people, who were in a sure that peopla, who were in a position of sure that people, who were in a position of working and not getting statutory sick pay right from the start, they will get that and we published the legislation to make it happen today and it is law as of today. Second thing we have to do is keep people in work because the best “Y keep people in work because the best way to make sure we are ready to bounce back is to keep people in their bounce back is to keep people in theirjobs, even when their businesses are struggling or closed, businesses are stmggling or closed, essentially businesses are struggling or closed, essentially because of decisions that the government has had to make for health reasons. And the third thing is we have to directly help peopla and thing is we have to directly help people and get money into people’s peopla and get money into people’s pockets to people and get money into people’s pockets to help them through this. You have already said you could not live on a statutory sick pay, it’s not enough, so will people get more not enough, so will peopla get more than not enough, so will people get more than that? I’m not going to prejudge what the Chancellor will say tomorrow but all I can say is mark tomorrow but all I ran say is mark my words, we tomorrow but all I can say is mark my words, we will do everything we ran to my words, we will do everything we can to make sure that people are ran to make sure that peopla are supported can to make sure that people are supported through this. That is the only way to deal with a once in a century event like this because we have to keep the whole public together. And it made the point very powerfuuy -- together. And it made the point very powerfully —— Andy made the point powerfuuy -- Andy made the point point we are powerfully —— Andy made the point point we are asking people to do point we are asking peopla to do incredibly point we are asking people to do incredibly unusual things, for instance to stay at home and not to go out. And if they are ill, not to go to work. We have got to make sure that they are not penalised for doing the right thing because the worst thing would be if people go worst thing would be if peopla go out and worst thing would be if people go out and spread this virus because they are not given the support to follow the rules we ourselves in follow the mles we ourselves in government follow the rules we ourselves in government are having to put in place for health reasons. Emphatically I am in support of the Emphatirally I am in support of the action we Emphatically I am in support of the action we have taken, hundreds of billions of pounds worth of action, and the action that we are finalising the details are. Will tomorrow answer all of these things? What I felt a little bit at the moment is that these statements at the moment are half answering things are not fully answering. Let me just read something. In our virtual way we want to hear from our audience, Roslyn says, "There are millions of freelance self employed traders who find themselves with their entire income for many months pulled under the current provisions for employees and businesses don’t necessarily include them. Will aid be introduced?" Martin says, I have staff and ready to lay off, what are you 1“P staff and ready to lay off, what are you tap into small businesses to make this personal protective equipment and prevent people." I’m interested in the comparison between the scientific and health response and the economic response. It seems to me on the scientific side we have EWUPS to me on the scientific side we have groups like Sage, #BBCQT —— SpyM do groups like Sage, #BBCOT -- SpyM do the modelling groups like Sage, #BBCQT —— SpyM do the modelling and the response has been quick but the economic side, it seems like we have been caught a bit seems like we have been taught a bit on the hop and seems like we have been caught a bit on the hop and having to make statements and try to fill in details afterwards. I wondered, you details afterwards. Iwondered, you have said details afterwards. I wondered, you have said it is a once in a century event, it is that health event as well as an economic event now. If you compare them, do you feel that on the economic side of things are a bit lacking or have people been bit lacking or have peopla been taught bit lacking or have peopla been caught out bit lacking or have people been caught out by it? No, I think the response on the economic side by the Chancellor has been unbelievably fast considering the scale of the economic consequences of the health decisions we have had to make. But in government, having to take the decisions of the scale that we have over the past two weeks it has been extraordinary. And of course the hard question is, how do we turn a decision at one of those podiums in Downing Street into real cash going Downing Street into real rash going into Downing Street into real cash going into people’s pockets. You see other countries who are behind us in terms of the number of deaths but are doing more to help workers, paying 75% of their wages so that they can 7596 of their wages so that they ran not be 75% of their wages so that they can not be stuck on a small wage. We did something this week with mortgage holidays. That might benefit people holidays. That might benefit peopla but it holidays. That might benefit people but it will also benefit landlords when the priority should have been renters, they should have been the first priority. We have got to do all these things. It’s not first priority. We have got to do all these things. It’s notjust Pace all these things. It’s not just Pace but who you all these things. It’s notjust Pace but who you prioritise first, and the point you agreed with a moment ago, help the people who cannot ago, help the peopla who cannot afford... ago, help the people who cannot afford... If they don’t get help, they can’t follow the advice. The prioritisation has to be a little more in tune with the level of need. Is the first people who we helped were people who otherwise would not have got a statutory sick pay. Must say, on the question itself, if you are regularty say, on the question itself, if you are regularly getting hours on a zero—hours contract, you are zero-hours contract, you are eligibla for zero—hours contract, you are eligible for statutory sick pay and eligibla for statutory sick pay and it’s eligibla for stamtory sick pay and it’s illegal eligible for statutory sick pay and it’s illegal not to pay it. Let’s be honest, there are 2 million people in this country who don’t earn enough to qualify for statutory sick PaY- enough to qualify for statutory sick pay. They earn less than £118 and pay. They earn lass than £118 and therre pay. They earn less than £118 and they’ re currently pay. They earn less than £118 and they’re currently being offered, if therre currently being offered, if they need to they’re currently being offered, if they need to self—isolate or they they need to self-isolate or they are sick, they they need to self—isolate or they are sick, they are offered benefits. Let’s be frank about that one. I think what we all have to play our part with, think what we all have to play our mummJ think what we all have to play our part with, I met the Chancellor today to discuss exactly this issue that we know, in Denmark and Germany and Sweden, we have these schemes that do put money directly into the pockets of workers. 50 that an pockets of workers. So that an employer pockets of workers. 50 that an employer who pockets of workers. So that an employer who otherwise might be thinking, because the credit facility will not help every business, there are some significant businesses that we know, our officers on the ground negotiating and coming to agreements with those businesses, they know they are in trouble. We know some big decisions troubla. We know some big decisions will be trouble. We know some big decisions will be taken over the next 48 hours. And I welcomed the efforts to look at bringing in a scheme that will replace incomes, provide that kind of 75% 25% possibly on a very kind of 7596 2596 possibly on a very big salt. But kind of 75% 25% possibly on a very big scale. But we have to get the big stale. But we have to get the delivery and I big scale. But we have to get the delivery and I do agree that every day counts at the moment. Our people day counts at the moment. Our peopla are day counts at the moment. Our people are dealing with redundancies, lay-offs, are dealing with redundancies, lay—offs, short time working and you lay-offs, short time working and you are quite right, lay—offs, short time working and you are quite right, Matt, that when we get through this, which we must, we have got to have decent get through this, which we must, we have got to have decentjobs for have got to have decent jobs for peopla to have got to have decentjobs for people to hold onto, to grow our peopla to hold onto, to grow our economy so people to hold onto, to grow our economy so that all of us will benefit and we fund our public services. That is what Gordon Brown spoke about, two waves of unemployment. We are seeing the first now unemployment. We are seeing the first new and this will cause a first now and this will cause a second first new and this will cause a second wave of unemployment. For me it is putting people on unpaid it is putting peopla on unpaid leave, it is putting people on unpaid leave, they can’t afford to go to the shop, buy clothes... And there has to be a transition in there as well, it has to be jobs and fair wages. Exactly. We have quite a few pressures to get through. ﬂ I would like to hear from a I would like to hearfrom a person I would like to hear from a person from I would like to hearfrom a person from Weston—super—Mare, Jacqueline from Weston-super-Mare, jacqueline Harris from Weston—super—Mare, Jacqueline Harris who is an educational assessment director. My husband and I are both in our 70s and my husband I are both in our 705 and my husband as a I are both in our 70s and my husband as a serious health problems. With as a serious health problams. with rarers, as a serious health problams. with carers, I as a serious health problams. with carers, Ialso as a serious health problems. With carers, I also look after my 94-year-old carers, I also look after my 94—year—old mother who has Alzheimer’s. And continuing to collact Alzheimer’s. And continuing to collect prescriptions and food because pharmacies can no longer because pharmacies ran no longer take on because pharmacies can no longer take on home deliveries and there was a three—week wait for online was a three-week wait for online supermarket was a three—week wait for online supermarket deliveries. My question is, how do I balance the risks between collecting medication and between collecting meditation and food between collecting medication and food and potentially spreading the virus, and how do we ramp up capacity to meet the demands on rarers, capacity to meet the demands on carers, pharmacies and supermarket rarers, pharmacies and supermarket workers? carers, pharmacies and supermarket workers? Let me add to that, we had a message from John, it broke my a message from john, it broke my heart, said, a message from John, it broke my heart, said, "I’m over a message from John, it broke my heart, said, "I’m over70 a message from John, it broke my heart, said, "I’m over 70 and classed as vulnerable, I’ve tried to classed as vulnerabla, I’ve tried to book an classed as vulnerable, I’ve tried to book an online shop for my groceries to save going out and the earliest I to save going out and the eartiest I ran get is the to save going out and the earliest I can get is the 29th of March. How am ran get is the 29th of March. How am I supposed to can get is the 29th of March. How am I supposed to last ten days with no food?‘ I supposed to last ten days with no food?" Tom? This is happening now food?‘ Tom? This is happening now and it’s a food?" Tom? This is happening now and it’s a desperately sad situation. The only positive thing, one of the positives from this crisis is that we are seeing these community groups cropping up all over the place. We are seeing younger healthy people volunteering. One of my daughters is saying she is going to help people locally. In going to help peopla locally. In this going to help people locally. In this kind of situation, if we can this kind of situation, if we ran put peopla this kind of situation, if we can put people together with those not add so much risk if they do the shopping, younger people, teenagers, adults at less risk, that might be adults at lass risk, that might be one way. It is adults at less risk, that might be one way. It is clearly adults at less risk, that might be one way. It is clearlyJohn who one way. It is dearty john who needs help one way. It is clearlyJohn who needs help right now. Where is he in needs help right now. where is he in the country? I needs help right now. Where is he in the country? I can’t tell you at the moment. But it has been a fantastic response in many parts of the country, people coming together to country, peopla coming together to help but it’s country, people coming together to help but it’s obviously not ideal. But we are in a crisis situation where we have to use different approaches to sort out problems. In approaches to sort out problams. In terms of approaches to sort out problems. In terms of what Jacqueline is the terms of what jacqueline is the same, terms of what Jacqueline is the same, balancing the risks between collecting medication and food and collecting meditation and food and potentially collecting medication and food and potentially spreading the virus... She has to get her medicine. She is wondering how to balance the risk. It is tough and you have to feel for somebody in her position. Tom said, there are so much good things happening to focus on the positives for a minute, there are seven great things about the country, people things about the country, peopla stepping things about the country, people stepping forward at a moment like this -- so many stepping forward at a moment like this —— so many great things pundit this -- so many great things pundit Gary Neville this —— so many great things pundit Gary Neville made his hotels available to the country. It is great when you see what people are prepared to do but more help is needed. This is where somebody in my position comes in because we can position comes in because we ran create a position comes in because we can create a people support system for this crisis. The committee I mentioned before, we met yesterday and the suggestion is that we might ask the Fire service in Greater Manchester to start ringing people Manchester to start ringing peopla in that Manchester to start ringing people in that position to say, what you need, what can be done? We have need, what ran be done? We have launched a need, what can be done? We have launched a website to mobilise volunteers. It is not finished yet but we are trying to build eight new support system where we use all of the capacity we have got put the Royal Mail in parts of Greater Manchester offered to do some home deliveries of items. It is coming together. We can’t leave it all to be spontaneous and groups doing this and that, we are trying to create a stmcture and that, we are trying to create a structure through which it can stmcture through which it ran happen. I structure through which it can happen. I hope next week we should be able to have that beginning to work. Angela? I be able to have that beginning to work. Angela? Ithink be able to have that beginning to work. Angela? I think a lot of peopla have work. Angela? I think a lot of people have done very much the same, there are WhatsApp groups in our neighbourhood and we can boast with neighbourhood and we ran boast with our [oral neighbourhood and we can boast with our local council and put in local our [oral council and put in [oral peopla and it’s our local council and put in local people and it’s literally who needs help and that there are 18 or older peopla who help and that there are 18 or older people who will get deliveries from about neighbours who can pick up medicine. And it has to be that community spirit. If there are initiatives from local councils to initiatives from [oral councils to start initiatives from local councils to start with. .. initiatives from local councils to start with... We have talked about rash ﬂow start with... We have talked about cash flow for businesses, how about rash ﬂow for businesses, how about for cash flow for businesses, how about for councils? I know it’s not popular but it needs to be said. More new popular but it needs to be said. More now than I used to see it! They need more support to do this. Doesn’t it bring up the best and worst in people if we are honest? I worst in peopla if we are honest? I think actually worst in people if we are honest? I think actually at the Royal Mail initiative, it is the postal worker’s union who put up that proposition pulled up they want to play a part. But don’t we have to hold a mirror up to ourselves because when I look at some of those supermarket shelves, people sweeping “P supermarket shelves, people sweeping up toilet rolls and soap, all the rest of it, disinfectant, it was almost like survival of the fittest. I do understand, when we are scared, often we think about our families first. But don’t we also as a community have to think about our neighbours, workmates, the elderly neighbours, workmates, the elderty and neighbours, workmates, the elderly and vulnerable? And start getting our heads screwed on about our values in this country. How have we got here? Last time you are on, you said you were working with supermarkets to make sure it people self-isolating supermarkets to make sure it people self—isolating they will be able to self-isolating they will be able to get food self—isolating they will be able to get food supplies. As you will know, a lot of supermarket have said he’s not talking to us so I’m not sure who you meant. We were talking to the supermarkets. One supermarket executive said they weren’t. There was more than one. If we have a situation where someone like was more than one. If we have a situation where someone likeJohn situation where someone like john cannot get an situation where someone likeJohn cannot get an online shop until the 29th of March... Said two weeks ago was accurate. The supermarkets I think are rising to this. They are not the only part of the answer. For instance, Iceland were the first to introduce a silver hour at the start of the day so that people could go of the day so that peopla could go to the of the day so that people could go to the supermarket, when the shells had been stacked overnight, if they were over 70. Keep two metres or six feet from other people and stay safe, and get their supplies. And I think that sort of measure from the supermarket is important. It is really important to say on public health grounds, you must go out and get your medicines and get food, just stay away from other people as just stay away from other peopla as much as you just stay away from other people as much as you can. There is a broader point, Andy, which is, yes, we are putting money into councils, we put £1.6 billion in today and, yes, the councils, this is a moment for councils to really rise, just as you are doing in Manchester as the organising group. But there is also something everybody can do. Not only following everybody ran do. Not only following the everybody can do. Not only following the rules in terms of self the mles in terms of self isolation, the rules in terms of self isolation, but if every single person who is fit and healthy checks the door on their left and checks the door on their right and over the road and does it in a respectful, community minded way, then we will find help for lots of people. So find help for lots of peopla. So yes, find help for lots of people. So yes, there is a role for Government, a role for charities and councils, a rolc for charities and councils, but a role for charities and councils, but everybody can play a part in but everybody ran play a part in this. just but everybody can play a part in this. Just keeping you on supermarkets for a minute, since that was the question there, some supermarkets are making their own decision to have, as you say, the special hour when the elderly can go special hour when the elderty ran go in or they say special hour when the elderly can go in or they say you can only buy four in or they say you ran only buy four or two of in or they say you can only buy four or two of something. You’re leaving it up to them. You don’t think there is a role for Government to be is a rola for Government to be saying you ran is a role for Government to be saying you can only sell this much saying you ran only sell this much to one person saying you can only sell this much to one person at a time? You are happy to live it up to them, even though we have a situation where peopla can’t though we have a situation where people can’t get an online delivery? We have been working with supermarkets for many weeks to prepare in this eventuality. That work had been going on and was why I talked about it last time, and it is absolutely... It got to be this sort of measures to stop this mass spying have got to be increased. Can I make have got to be increased. (“an I make a have got to be increased. Can I make a constructive suggestion? I think you need to give councils an ability to go to the front of the queue with people like to go to the front of the queue with people likeJohn, who needs to get people like john, who needs to get to the people likeJohn, who needs to get to the front of the queue. I was told today somebody who has cystic fibrosis, I think late 20s or 30s, fibrosis, I think late 205 or 305, who doesn’t have the ability to get out because of the risk, three or four weeks having to wait to get food, so there needs to be an arrangement whereby councils, for people who they are acting for, can peopla who they are acting for, ran go to the front people who they are acting for, can go to the front of the queue and I think you could put that in place with supermarkets. I come back to this point, councils do need more help. From tomorrow morning, we are waiving the 9:303m restriction on waiving the 9:30am restriction on older waiving the 9:303m restriction on older and disabled people using older and disablad peopla using their older and disabled people using their bus passes on mac or delete in Manchester, so they can get to the Manchester, so they ran get to the earty morning Manchester, so they can get to the early morning shopping hours. But earty morning shopping hours. But please think early morning shopping hours. But please think about the capacity of councils. We have had a decade here where we are not in the best place to face this, because the resilience of some of our public services has been really degraded. Your predecessor was on Newsnight the other night and said he regretted the silent social care cuts. Silent? the silant social rare cuts. Silant? I was pointing the silent social care cuts. Silent? I was pointing them out to him every single day, he I was pointing them out to him every single day, hejust I was pointing them out to him every single day, he just chose not to singla day, he just chose not to listen to single day, he just chose not to listen to what I was saying. As Frances was saying, there has to be some reassessment when we get through this, and we will get through this, of through this, and we will get through this, ofjust how you cannot mn through this, ofjust how you cannot run essential services that councils mn essential services that councils provide on run essential services that councils provide on thin air and we do need to remember that, because it is about the resilience of the country at the end of the day. Let’s take one more question, from Sam, again from Weston—super—Mare, and is an from Weston-super-Mare, and is an A-level from Weston—super—Mare, and is an A—level student. My name is Sam, I’m A-level student. My name is Sam, I’m an A-level A—level student. My name is Sam, I’m an A—level student and my question an A-level student and my question is given the an A—level student and my question is given the cancellation of GCSEs is given the cancellation of 6655 and is given the cancellation of GCSEs and A—levels this year, what is the and A-levels this year, what is the fairest and A—levels this year, what is the fairest alternative for the students that have worked so hard for two years? Is it the case that this year years? Is it the use that this year EWUP years? Is it the use that this year group will be years? Is it the case that this year group will be the one written off by universities and future employers? Frances, I am sure you have been talking to head Frances, I am sure you have been talking to headteachers and Frances, I am sure you have been talking to head teachers and all sorts about this. What is the view, sorts about this. what is the view, where are sorts about this. What is the view, where are we heading? First of all, my heart breaks for him and anybody who has kids that age going through exams, they know who has kids that age going through exams, they knowjust how that exams, they know just how that feels. So exams, they knowjust how that feels. So I think it is really important and feels. So I think it is really importantand I’m feels. So I think it is really important and I’m sure the Government will be on this, they will provide some real reassurance to that generation of young people to that generation of young peopla that, you to that generation of young people that, you know... Are you getting any sense of how teachers, what they would think? Yes, I can tell you would think? Yes, I ran tell you they are would think? Yes, I can tell you they are desperate for really clear guidance. So they are glad that a decision has been taken, because what they were seeing was individual schools having to close, probably because of their own staff capacity or sickness, all issues, so they are glad there is a decision. They now need really clear guidance on who are the children of key workers, how are we going to make sure that young peopla are are we going to make sure that young people are getting that assessment that is fair and kind to them, given what therve that is fair and kind to them, given what they’ve been through, what do what therve been through, what do we do what they’ve been through, what do we do about kids in poverty, not just kids on free school meals, but we know because of what is happening with their parents that there are going to be more and more children joining the ranks of the poor, how do we look after them? That is where councils and voluntary organisations are so important. And also councils and voluntary organisations are so important. And alsojust councils and voluntary organisations are so important. And also just to remember that teachers are mums and dads, too, very often and they have got those worries about what to do I do? What happens if I need to self—isolate? So, again, we need self-isolate? So, again, we need some real self—isolate? So, again, we need some real help for parents, I think. We have unpaid emergency leave in this country. Again, unpaid isn’t going to put food on the table so we need a joined up approach but I think teachers and support staff, who are critical again, we need dean who are critical again, we need clean schools to keep operating, but dean schools to keep operating, but they want to clean schools to keep operating, but they want to be in the room with ministers talking about this, head teachers, teachers, support staff, because they are the ones that have to make it work, so they are desperate to have real dialogue. Let me relay a tweet from Kevin, who put when will pupils me relay 3 tweet from Kevin, who put when will pupils find out about her GGFs when will pupils find out about her GCSEs and A—levels are going to be awarded? He goes on to say today has been one of the hardest days I’ve ever known as a teacher, saying goodbye to these pupils without being able to answer their questions. It must be very difficult. I got a teenage daughter who is in that exact situation, she found out yesterday her GCSEs have found out yesterday her 6655 have been found out yesterday her GCSEs have been cancelled, on the background of a couple of weeks of increasing anxiety and increasing numbers of kids not going to school and parents worrying. In fact, kids not going to school and parents worrying. Infect, I have kids not going to school and parents worrying. In fact, I have been doing Twitter polls to try and gauge pub“: Twitter polls to try and gauge public opinion on some of these issues about where they stand compared to what the official advices and I think, although the scientific advice has been we don’t need to close the schools yet in terms of controlling the outbreak, it has become clear that it increasingly was going to be difficult to continue with this situation. I think to try and answer the question from Sam about what is the fairest way. I mean, clearly, the fairest way. I mean, dearty, when I did, the fairest way. I mean, clearly, when I did, they were called our levels back then... I remember those, quite a few of us on the panel remember —— 0 levels. You did panel remember -- 0 levels. You did quite a bit of the panel remember —— 0 levels. You did quite a bit of the work through the year and then there was the exam but now, quite a lot of work is done through the year through coursework and then other assessments that there is experience in the community on how to look at the school children’s coursework and making an assessment of their grades overall, so it is going to be a time of anxiety for them, mixed with great rejoicing. Some of them are in two minds! Yes, mixed feelings, perhaps. So clarity and minds! Yes, mixed feelings, perhaps. 50 clarity and resolution in the So clarity and resolution in the next few weeks. As I understand, we will hear tomorrow, is that right, exactly what is happening with GCSEs exactly what is happening with 6655 and exactly what is happening with GCSEs and A—levels on how children will be and A-levels on how children will be able to and A—levels on how children will be able to proceed? And this question of the key workers as well, exactly how that is defined. I have been working on that today. Is there anything you can tell us about that? anything you ran tell us about that? It will anything you can tell us about that? It will include not only NHS staff but also social care and those who but also social rare and those who are working on but also social care and those who are working on the supply of medical devices, like the sort of masks we were talking about at the top of the programme. What about people who programme. what about peopla who work in programme. What about people who work in supermarkets? Well, the list will be published tomorrow, we know we have to get it out tomorrow because the schools are closing to everybody else from Monday. This was a decision nobody wanted to take, it is just an awful situation and my heart goes out to Sam, who has worked so hard, and everybody in that situation, so we will get that information out as fast as we possibly can. Has all of this possibly ran. Has all of this happened possibly can. Has all of this happened a lot faster than you were expecting? No, it hasn’t. All of the steps we have had to take, they were put out in the action plan two weeks ago. But it was only a few days ago it was no question of closing the schools. That is not quite right, we have always been clear that we weren’t doing the steps at that moment but would be prepared to if we needed to and then we got to the point where we needed to. You know, we have always said, along this terrible journey, we have always said, along this terriblejourney, as we have always said, along this terrible journey, as we we have always said, along this terriblejourney, as we have been terrible journey, as we have been trying to terriblejourney, as we have been trying to battle this disease, we will do the right thing at the right time and the decision of school closures had to be made, because we have got to get the virus under control and, also, the faster we can control and, also, the faster we ran get it under control and, also, the faster we can get it under control, the faster we ran get it under control, the faster we can release some of these measures, ran release some of these measures, as well as can release some of these measures, as well as putting in the place the testing we were talking about at the start of the programme. I agree with what Matt is saying, I think it was the right all what Matt is saying, I think it was the right call and I remember being the right all and I remember being in the the right call and I remember being in the same position when things that went looking that possible all that went looking that possibla all of a that went looking that possible all of a sudden become sober, because this week, head of a sudden become sober, because this week, headteachers were this week, head teachers were finding this week, headteachers were finding things quite uncensored —— unsustainable on the ground because unsustainable on the ground berause pupils were unsustainable on the ground because pupils were off, staff are off and it was hard to hold things together. MY it was hard to hold things together. My daughter is the same, my daughter is an A—level student, definitely in is an A-level student, definitely in two minds, is an A—level student, definitely in two minds, half of her wanted to cry, half wanting to get the champagne out. I have a feeling about this, having spoken to her today, I about this, having spoken to her today, Ithink about this, having spoken to her today, I think there has to be a fair process that looks not today, I think there has to be a fair process that looks notjust fair process that looks not just that fair process that looks notjust that one thing, not fair process that looks notjust that one thing, notjust predictive that one thing, not just predictive grades, but that one thing, notjust predictive grades, but works and takes a rounded view and a fair process, but, then again, let some who want to rerun the year. I know that might create capacity issues and colleges colleges but this can’t be the last Covid generation, it can’t be your year was unlucky and sorry and no one gets the University they want and lives are thrown upside down. You need to take the most permissive and supportive approach and I thought I was hearing that from the Prime Minister yesterday and I have confidence the Government will come forward with a fair process tomorrow. You feel for all of these peopla who tomorrow. You feel for all of these people who have studied and worked peopla who have studied and worked so hard people who have studied and worked so hard and we hope that they get a full decision about what will happen with their exams. As you said, Frances, I have friends who are teachers and they have children of school and it can be challenging on school and it ran be challanging on many fronts, school and it can be challenging on many fronts, actually, lots of children of school. Exams weren’t always that fair, what do you went into the room, so this could be a fairer process. Universities will be sympathetic, I am at the University of Liverpool and there has been a lot of thinking about looking after both our current students, who are all working remotely are not missing lassons, it is all working remotely are not missing lessons, it is all happening online lassons, it is all happening online but also lessons, it is all happening online but also how we look at the future students and make sure they have their access. As you say, this will be the Covid generation. There is one further point to make, which is when that kids are off school, they mustn’t go and stay with their grandparents if they are over 70, because that would be counter—productive. So the kids have counter-productive. So the kids have got to stay. . . counter—productive. So the kids have got to stay... Those kids who stay in school who only have grandparents as an option? That is an important point and slightly surprising. Schools, clearly something had to Schools, dearty something had to change and Schools, clearly something had to change and this is now the big decision you have to make over what our key workers. An alternative approach would have been to say school is no longer compulsory in this country and parents can decide this country and parents ran decide what this country and parents can decide what their needs are, their own needs and the needs of the children and then you would avoid this really difficult decision about what is a key worker, because most workers are key in some way and those who could look after their own kids because, between the parents they can work it between the parents they ran work it out, who ran between the parents they can work it out, who can stay at home, that out, who ran stay at home, that would out, who can stay at home, that would work. Those where grandparents are the only option and we don’t want them staying with grandparents, they ran be want them staying with grandparents, they can be put into school and it they ran be put into school and it would be they can be put into school and it would be a much smaller number than it is now, it could be would be a much smaller number than it is now, it could bejudged by the it is now, it could be judged by the number of it is now, it could bejudged by the number of teachers, you will have more space in school and potentially, it would have been an alternative approach. Well, we will hear tomorrow but there is a limit to how much you want to tell us. Our our reserve, I’m afraid to say. It’s been an interesting way of doing the programme -- been an interesting way of doing the programme —— our one hour is up. It programme -- our one hour is up. It has been programme —— our one hour is up. It has been rather quiet in some senses. I have missed you, audience, not having you here. I am pleased to 55V not having you here. I am pleased to say we will be doing next week and for the foreseeable future, say we will be doing next week and for the foreseeable future, live say we will be doing next week and for the foreseeable future, live and say we will be doing next week and for the foreseeable future, live and eight o’clock. So if you want to be part of the virtual audience, go and apply the usual way and if you want your say on what we have been discussing this evening, Adrian dismissing this evening, Adrian Chile’s discussing this evening, Adrian chile’s and discussing this evening, Adrian chile’s and Question Time extra time is on Radio 5Live and you can chile’s and Question Time extra time is on Radio 5Live and you can listen is on Radio 5Live and you ran listen to the is on Radio 5Live and you can listen to the coronavirus podcast on BBC to the coronavirus podrast on BBC science. to the coronavirus podrast on BBC science. to the coronavirus podcast on BBC science. Thank you to the panel for coming and for everyone who recorded a question or got in touch during the programme. From Weston—super—Mare, bye—bye