Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi, an MP for ten years, currently the government’s business and industry minister and before that, children’s minister. Joining us down the line from Cardiff, Labour secretary for health and social services in the Welsh Government, Vaughan Gething. An MP who left Westminster to become a member of the Senedd and was elected two years ago as leader of Plaid Cymru, Adam Price. Claire Fox, a former Communist turned Brexit Party MEP. She was made a Baroness by Boris Johnson last year and is director of the free—speech organisation, Institute of ideas. And joining us from Teesside, Paralympian, multiple gold medal winner and two—time world champion wheelchair racer, now a campaigner and crossbench peer, Tanni Grey—Thompson. APPLAUSE. Good evening, welcome to my guests here in the studio and to Vaughan and Tanni who arejoining us down the line and of course to our Virtual audience, tonight you are from Swansea, thank you very much forjoining us for the programme this evening and of course thanks to you forjoining us at home and for watching and if you want to join in the conversation, you can do it in the usual way, @bbcquestiontime, and on social media and let’s hear what you have got to say. Right, we will start with ourfirst question, which is from Mikejones. Thanks, Fiona. As BorisJohnson has announced severe tier levels in England, should we alljust be as strict as possible and buckle down to avoid another spike early in the New Year? Tanni. Do you want to start us off? Yeah, I think this is incredible. I think the good thing about Christmas is that everyone is agreed on what we should be doing in terms of lockdown. I think the guidance is really important, but the tier system is a reaction to the R rate going up and I think it is important. My worry over Christmas is that it willjust get very complicated in January, February, March and there could be a huge lockdown for everybody and I think people are tired, they are exhausted with, you know working at home, we are living at work, and the mental health pressures on people are going to be huge. So, it is incredibly important that I think people are really sensible over Christmas, you know, they are not going to be stupid, they have to take some personal responsibility with this, but we are a long way from getting a vaccine and being out of this and on the other side. I think it is quite hard, actually, when every part of the country, potentially, has different levels, to actually understand what you can and cannot do, because the guidance gets quite complicated in terms of crossing borders and regions and areas and I know where I live we were told in the previous lockdown that it was County Durham and then it turned out it was the Durham County. I think everyone has got to be really, really clear on what those levels mean to individuals. And you are in Tier 3 as of next week, Tanni. Nadhim, the question is should we all be as strict as possible, I mean 99% of England is under Tier 2 and Tier 3 now, is this another lockdown by another name? Well, if you look at Tier 2 and Tier 3, you are absolutely right, they have been tightened up, but retail will reopen. People can go to the gym, clearly there are differences and people should obviously look at gov.uk to see where their area is. They are tougher, the R number has been coming down and it is now between one and 1.1, it was 1.3 before the national interventions in England were introduced. between one and 1.1, it was 1.3 before the national interventions in England were introduced. That will end on the 2nd of December and this new tiering system will apply. Look, I think the combination of community testing which we saw worked really well in Liverpool and Liverpool is a great example of the local leadership working with the government to get this right. They are in Tier 2 I think a positive. In other areas, like my area, sadly, in the West Midlands, we are in Tier 3 and although Stratford—upon—Avon has a low infection rate per 100,000, the surrounding area of Solihull and North Warwickshire is much higher, so we have had to go into Tier 3. And can I ask you about the mass testing, because the Prime Minister gave a press conference today at five o’clock and he said, the previous tier systems slow down infection rates. Mass testing could allow individuals to be released from certain restrictions, even if they are living in Tier 3. What did he mean by that? Did he mean... We are talking about individuals, everyone in Tier 3 coming out in a particular region, but individuals within Tier 3 could get a test and then, what? Have people round? What did he mean? So, the pilot that was run in Liverpool, which I think is really important, is, if you are then tested every day for five days, if you were someone who has been notified through test and trace of someone who has the infection that you have been close to, then you do not have to quarantine. That is a big change. So, the people who are in Tier 3 as of next week, let us be clear, because this was new information this afternoon, that is 23 million people, if they are in Tier 3 next week, they have to be, what, tested for five days in a row and then they are free to do what they want or what did he mean exactly? The pilot that was run in Liverpool was around, if you are notified that you have been in contact with someone who has tested positive for coronavirus, at the moment you would have to quarantine. As the Prime Minister is doing. If you, as we did in Liverpool... Isn’t that a different thing, though? I just want to be really clear, because it really struck me, if the Prime Minister is saying that mass testing could allow individuals to be released from certain restrictions, even when they are in Tier 3, he is saying that people that have a negative test can live in a different way to those who have not had a negative test or haven’t even been tested at all in Tier 3, is that what he means? No, I think the restriction is the quarantine issue. So, if you are, as we have just done in Liverpool, if you get notified, you have to quarantine, therefore further restrictions on your ability to move around. If you get a test every day and you test negative, then you don’t have to quarantine and that is being delivered through this pilot community testing. But that is true everywhere, notjust here three. He was just referring to Tier 3. The reason he was referring to Tier 3 is because we are focusing community testing on Tier 3 areas. Claire. Should we all be as strict as possible and buckle down? When we were told that we had to accept the lockdown, which a lot of people felt very unhappy about, felt that there was not enough evidence for national lockdown, it was very much on the assumption that we would leave the lockdown and things might have improved. The reality is that over 23 million people who had previously been living under Tier1 had gone into lockdown and have now come out in higher tiers. It feels like perpetual punishment and even the way we are talking about it, you know, a kind of release from certain restrictions, you know, whether the Prime Minister will allow us, if we buckle down, and then we can have Christmas, then the whole discussion around Christmas has been very much, you know, well, we are going to indulge you people who want Christmas with their families for five days, but you are going to pay for it. And I am afraid that the problem for me with this whole discussion is that we are free, we are supposed to live in a free society, a democracy, but we are behaving as though we are in a pre—democratic time with some kind of fiefdom announcing and micromanaging exactly what we should do. I think it is the opposite of getting consent, of bringing about trust, of encouraging people to take themselves seriously, because we are literally having discussions like this, technocratic, would it meanness? Does it mean that? Should I dot the i and cross the t? Given that we are in a pandemic, what is the alternative? Yes, but there are ways of dealing with pandemics, lots of different possibilities. Claire, you saw the response from Liverpool and the community in Liverpool and people actually coming out and working together and they have done really well. Yes, but social solidarity requires that people do not believe that arbitrarily their freedoms are taken away from them and there is no balance of risks. The only thing that we face at the moment is, you know, you say we are in a pandemic, we are in a pandemic, we also undoubtedly will talk about the economy. That pandemic is one of the things facing the society, as are very many others and the way we have responded to that pandemic has created a tsunami, a pandemic, of unemployment, of immiseration, of isolation, of the robbing of autonomy and of our freedoms and of our civil liberties and at the very least I should be able to say that without the inference being that I have not noticed we are living in a pandemic. I think it is important and I think also, by the way, many of the local authorities that are now going to have higher tiers is actually falling rates of coronavirus. Death rates are going down in relation to what they were. So, what I am saying is, we are told if only we accept this particular hard measure, all will be well. Well, we have just had a lockdown, we are not even out of it and now we are being told, we are going to have hard tiering and we have got to behave, otherwise we will not have Christmas and then at Christmas you have got to be sensible otherwise you are going to pay for it. It is like some sort of religious cult we have entered into and the one thing that nobody discusses is what this does for freedom and democracy in society and I really think that is a very serious price to pay and should at least be debated fully. Well, let us see what our audience are thinking in Swansea. Gemma. Yes, thank you, Ijust wanted to say I don’t really see how these tiers work at all. I think we were in 3 tier system and that resulted in us going into another lockdown and a in Wales. I think the lockdown in March was far more effective because there was one rule for everybody and we knew what we had to do, but with all these different tiers I just think it adds confusion. I am from a small valley where there has been a spike in cases and I think we need to protect people in areas with the cases are low to make sure that we do not get any cases escalating in those areas. Claire. Thank you, Fiona. I think it is all very confusing. I think it is all open to interpretation and it all boils down to trust. I think trust is really important. Here in Wales, the firebreak lockdown clearly worked, numbers were falling, ten consecutive days, numbers were falling and then recently numbers have started to increase and that is mainly in the under 255 group and I think that the message has to go out loud and clear that everybody has a part to play and trust is key, trust is essential. So, everybody has to be prepared to take part and do their bit. Of course, you are living under different rules in Wales, Claire, are you saying that they are confusing? I think our rules in Wales are quite straightforward, actually, but listening to all the different tier system is and where you can go and where you can eat and where you can go to socialise and who could socialise, listening to some of my friends and colleagues in the different tier systems in England, it is quite baffling at times and I think even they are confused. So, I think we need clarity. And Michael. Michael B. Hello. Thank you. I just wanted to say, is it really worth the potential oppression and depression that spending time at the family over Christmas that we could lead into a potential third wave of coronavirus? Is it really worth that potential risk? So, as far as you are concerned, it would be betterfor us to stay apart at Christmas? I think so, yes. I think we are coming into January, it is probably one of the most depressing months in the year and then we are probably going into another lockdown. Is that really worth it for spending a few days with family? Vaughan? Vaughan Gething? Well, these are incredibly difficult choices for all of us, whether we are members of the public, going about living our lives, front line health and care staff, who are looking after us all and indeed politicians like me, a Health Minister with some responsibility for more than 3 million souls here in Wales. There is nothing glib, we are not looking to take away people’s liberties. We are looking to do the right thing, to keep while safe and to protect as many lives as possible. The rules are only part of that. What we are really trying to do is to help people to think about what we should do. The firebreak did work, it did significantly reduce the numbers of infections. It saw a flat line, but they are starting to rise again and as we see that extra mix in those extra cases, that means more people coming into our hospitals and it means more people who will not come out of hospitals and the infection rates that are rising in under 255 will eventually translate into people over the age of 60 and they are much more likely to come to harm. So, our real challenge is understanding how people behave, how we help people to make different choices and to accept that we cannot micromanage every situation, but our responsibility, we clear up what we want people to do and there are times we set harder rules about what can happen. We have got a much bigger testing programme now than what we had at the start and here in Wales we have got a very effective test, trace and protect system that in the last week up to 92% of index cases and 82% of their contacts. And, Vaughan, you talk about the fact that cases are beginning to rise again. I mean, looking at Blaenau Gwent, for example, you’ve got A10 cases per 100,000. But two households can meet, pubs and restaurants are open. Whereas in Manchester, for example, there are 250 cases per 100,000 and pubs and restaurants are shut, except for takeaway. I know that you’ve been meeting today to talk about next step for the Welsh Government, are you envisaging tighter restrictions, going forward? It’s entirely possible. And that isn’t because it’s something that I celebrate. I never came into politics to intervene in the way people live their lives in this sort of way. But if we don’t do something then, as I say, we’ll witness and we’ll stand by while people are coming to harm, and we can’t do that. The responsibility of the government is to care for the people we’re responsible for, the people that we serve, and I’ve already indicated at the start of this week that we’re looking at the potential for different national measures. And I always said — as the First Minister did — going into the firebreak, we hope to get to the end of the year, but if case numbers move in the wrong direction, we may have to do something different. And it’s entirely possible we’ll have to do that. The cabinet will meet again during the day tomorrow and we’ll have some decisions to make. All of those decisions are how we take care of ourselves and each other, and how we continue to keep safe. And in that, the reason we’ve been able to have some success in with what we’ve done with the firebreak is because people have responded to the measures we’ve taken and the leadership we’ve given. But we still need to do more to get there, in this great national effort against a pandemic. In public health terms, but also the economic... OK, I need to bring the rest of the panel in, Vaughan. Thank you. Adam. Yes. And clearly, the Welsh Government does have some difficult decisions to make in the next few days. And how do you think those decisions should go? Well, look, I mean, the first thing, I think none of this is easy. I think Claire is right that there is a balance of harms always and risks here that has to be considered. But clearly, the position that you don’t want to be in is to see that exponential rise in cases again. And particularly... The current restrictions, it would seem, are not going to be enough to keep that level, the prevalence of the disease down. And then you’re in a very dangerous position, where you could see a rise in cases leading to a rise in hospitalisation throughout December, as we get to Christmas, when you have the easing in order to allow people to get together. So, what’s your response to Michael’s question? Should we alljust be as script as possible and buckle down? Absolutely. I think the point that the audience has made actually, in terms of the importance of trust, the importance of clear communication, and underlining the fact that governments have an important role. There are certain things that only governments can do and the rules and the regulations, the restrictions are part of that. But actually, we will only defeat this virus if we all play our part. You know, that’s the real truth of the situation. Lockdowns should only ever be a last—resort option, when you have to do that because of this exponential rise. The way we suppress the virus is if we keep to those simple rules of avoiding, wherever possible, you know, close contact in crowded situations. So, we all have a contribution to make. Clearly, the Government is going to have to make some difficult decisions. The one plea is, if they are looking at introducing similar Tier 3—like restrictions in hospitality, we have to provide the economic support. So we’ve got to align health policy with the economic policy, so if we’re closing businesses, I would like to see the Welsh Government providing a higher level of support to those businesses to help them effectively to hibernate. To survive through this difficult period. You know, there is some light at the end of the tunnel, we are going to get through this, but let’s save lives and save livelihoods. So let’s make sure that we have the health and the economic policy working in tandem, and that goes for the self—employed as well. The self—employed have been badly let down by the UK Government. So I’d like to see the Welsh Government going one better and helping those people that have fallen between the cracks. I need to bring the audience in as well, who are sitting here very patiently. Hannah. Ijust wanted to say that I agree with the point I think it was Michael made about, is it worth itjust for a few days at Christmas? You know, we’re talking about cases rising, it looks like cases are going to rise through December and, yet, the green light’s been given to people to meet at Christmas time, regardless of where we are at at this point. Is it really worth it? A lot of us don’t want to, yet we’re all going to pay for it in either way. 0K, Rachel. Hi. I just feel that the devolved governments have done so much better a job of passing the messages on than the Westminster Government has done. I think it’s been quite a learning opportunity for Westminster, if only they would actually pay attention to what the devolved governments are doing. Peter. I think it’s important that we as a country all work together to reduce the risk to the most vulnerable. And if that means that we have to forego time at Christmas with the ones that we love, then I think that is something that we should all do for the greater good. 0K. Briefly, Claire, yes. Yeah, I think we all want to protect the vulnerable, but one of the problems with a lot of the lockdown measures — and that includes tiering systems — is the very people who are being neglected are the vulnerable. I mean, you can’t visit people in care homes. They are lonely. Mrs Smith, in number 16, can’t get any visitors. People with dementia in care homes are dying because they’re not being stimulated, they’ve got no attention. The vulnerable are actually being neglected by our attempts at protecting the vulnerable. You can visit care homes in Wales, it’s worth pointing out, given there are already exceptions in Swansea. Yes, yes, but it’s also the case that there’s been massive restrictions on visits in care homes in Wales. I’m from Wales and know people in care homes. The misery, the terror, the horror, the loneliness. We’re making it sound as though... And then people have said, well, don’t let’s have Christmas, then. I think people don’t have to have Christmas if you don’t want to, feel free. I think that we have to consider what it is we consider to be important about what it means to be alive, how we relate to people, what our relationships are like with people. And I think thatjust seeing it through Covid eyes only means that we neglect the hugely important social aspects of protecting people, of sociability, civility. Young people are having their lives thwarted and, you know, people kind of talk about them going out and wanting to go and have a drink as if it’s the most irresponsible thing in the world, and then we infantilise people in the process, because we don’t trust them. So when people say about trust, you can’t have trust if you then say, "But if you break the rules, you’ll be fined and you’ll be accused of killing Granny." You’ve got to actually trust people, and that requires a different approach to this. And I think it would actually be beneficial to the vulnerable to adopt that. Very quickly because, otherwise, I can’t move on to the next question. We’re piloting schemes in 20 care homes of how we can get two visits in through testing. And of course, the weekly testing of care staff and the monthly testing of residents. And I have to give a shout—out — I’m a patron of a charity called Kissing it Better, which gets young people to go to care homes through the Covid crisis, and before, to perform, to sing outside, and has made a huge difference. Something makes me think we’ll be talking about Christmas restrictions for however many days there are left of Christmas, I don’t know, but I know it’s coming up very quickly. But before I do, Ijust want to say that we’re looking for people to join our virtual audience for next week’s programme. That is in Bath. And the week after that, Chelmsford. Obviously, we can’t come to you, but you can come to us from the comfort of your living room. So, if you live in or around Bath or Chelmsford, do get in touch on the Question Time website. Come and be part of the programme. You are what makes Question Time what it is, so dojoin in. Right, let’s take our next question now, which is from Janette Williams. Thanks, Fiona. The economic effect caused by Covid—19 will be felt for years. Should public—sector workers expect pay rises whilst thousands from the private sector are faced with unemployment? Vaughan. I think public—sector workers do deserve a fair pay rise. People have been on streets applauding for them in the first wave. We’re now told that the Government, the UK Government, will fund a health—service pay rise, but not other public—service workers. And yet, we have environmental health officers from the local government who have been a key part of our response. We have all the staff who have worked to keep our schools open. All those other local workers, police officers and the Army. The Army are a key part of the response to the mass testing in Merthyr Tydfil. And yet, they’re being told that they don’t deserve a pay rise. And actually, suppressing pay in our public sector will actually mean there are less people who will be able to go and spend in the local economy as well, so I don’t think it’s the right choice. I think it’s a real kick in the teeth for so many people who kept the country going, and we’re still going to rely on those people through a very, very difficult winter. I think the Chancellor should take the opportunity to think again because it sends out a message about how much we value people who have given up so much — and, in some cases, everything — to keep all of us safe. Janette, you asked the question, what’s your view? I’ve worked in the public sector most of my employment. I think the nurses, the police, I’d want to give, there’s so many people have contributed to, you know, immensely to the cause with Covid. But we haven’t got the money, you know, the money’s not going to be there. How do you solve it, do we need to just take stock? Fantastic that the NHS has got the money. However, I don’t know. I really don’t know, it’s a huge one. Claire. I think it’s really wrong, Vaughan, to talk about this decision as being about anyone saying that no—one... You said, no—one is being told... You said, people are being told that they don’t deserve a pay rise. I don’t think anyone is saying that. I think actually, it is incredibly divisive at the moment to try and imply that public—sector workers not getting a pay rise at this time is because, you know, there’s always the danger of evil Tories hate the public sector. But let’s consider what, for example, your firebreak lockdown did in Wales to the people who run nail bars, to the hairdressers, to the people whose life savings have been absolutely destroyed, who face bankruptcy, who potentially are going to lose their homes. These people... I mean, nobody deserved to be told that they couldn’t make a living but, as people keep reminding me, there’s a pandemic, and the Government brought in certain things and furlough isn’t sufficient. You know, and many public—sector workers are actually in a stronger decision at the moment, in terms ofjob security, than people in the private sector. You know, the private sector is full of people who actually also were the invisible front line that kept us going, the people who dropped off to those people who enjoy working from home, who dropped off the Amazon, the Deliveroo drivers. All of these people deserve pay rises. We all deserve pay rises. But what I’d say is, that misses the point. And you cannot be in a situation, and I can’t understand why the Labour Party haven’t worked this bit out. The Labour Party have been calling forstronger, harder, longer, deeper lockdowns since the beginning of this thing. They want to close the economy down and then seem to be shocked that there is an economic crisis that’s going to be the greatest facing for notjust decades, but for centuries. So, we’ve got a major problem. At some point, somebody’s got to create... We’ve got to have development, economic prosperity, industrialisation, to create the facilities that allow public sector, not the facilities, that allow the public sector to exist in the first place. To highlight public sector as though they’re the only heroes of this pandemic, I completely salute care workers and all the rest of it. I salute the public sector workers who worked. But my goodness, the people who didn’t work weren’t just lazing around doing nothing, working for the private sector, getting well paid. They’re being absolutely treated with contempt and have been forgotten and, therefore, don’t be divisive about it. Jared. 0h, Vaughan. 0K, quickly, sorry. We’ve got the best support of any UK nation to support the private sector through the pandemic. We have put our money where our mouth is in supporting public sector workers. We’ve also put significant financial support over and above what the UK Government has provided to our private sector. The idea that we despise the private sector is just simply not true. It’s a strawman, not a serious answer to the really serious questions we face as a country. This really is a fight for lives and livelihoods, and that has always driven our approach here in Wales. Tanni. Most of my close family work in the front line of the public sector so my heart says, yes, absolutely, people need to feel valued. And one of my best friends is a nurse and I said to her, actually, can you explain the last three or four pay rises to me? And actually, you almost need a degree in economics to work it out because, half the time, it’s a pay freeze and over ten years, rather than actually something that is a pay rise. So my heart says, yes. However, if you look at the figures of where we are now, this is twice as bad as the crisis in 2008. This is the most amount of money the British Government has had to borrow since the Second World War. And we have to think about how we pay that back, because we have to pay it back at some time. So, for me, it’s thinking about how we can be more creative with the economy. You know, we know four out of five pubs — if they’re in Tier 2 and Tier 3 — won’t open, going forward, will choose not to open. And thatjust keeps having a big effect on all the different economy. But for me, you know, I do a lot of work in physical activity and that sector, and it’s thinking about how we can change the value, how we can bring different sectors together to boost the economy. And we have to be really creative, in a way that we’ve never had to do before. You know, we talk aboutjoining up government, you know, that never quite works because the legislation work is always in specific subject areas. But I think we have to be more creative. have got so much sympathy for businesses that are yo—yoing in and out and don’t know what to do. I worked on the Welfare Reform Bill in 2012 and legal aid punishment fans and we thought that was brutal and it is much worse now and we have also got to think about the people on Universal Credit, that is pushing them into even greater poverty. We have got to think about how we can protect the most vulnerable that we have in society. There are no easy answers to this. I mean, it is really easy for me as a parliamentarian to sit and tell the government what I think they should do. We have all got opinions on everything. I don’t think I would want to be the Chancellor right now. He is in an unenviable position in terms of what they are trying to do. We have to find a way out of this. Let’s hear what our audience have got to say. Kane. Yeah, Ijust wanted to bring in the voluntary on the third sector. I work in a third sector organisation and I think across the board in Wales, the sector have done an incredible job in terms of working with the most vulnerable in society over the pandemic period. When we are discussing public services and pay rises, and private versus public sector, I think the voluntary sector often goes missing in that debate. I also work with people who are living directly, struggling directly with poverty. A lot of parent carers who actually are completely unpaid for the work that they do, so I think we need to be having this debate within a wider context, bearing in mind that services, personal assistance services, carers, have been unable to undertake their normal duties and we have a lot of parents, women especially, who have been left to take that role and they have had no reward and no financial recompense for doing that whatsoever. Jack. Well, I would just like to say that I agree completely with Claire on this point. At this stage of the pandemic, speaking of pay rises is completely unwarranted, really. It only serves to split us apart when at this point we should stand together and in addition to that, who gets to say who should be paid what? How can you put a price on a life? Jared. I completely agree with Claire’s point and it is really refreshing to see somebody in the mainstream media making this case for looking at the bigger picture, rather than the knee jerk lockdown reactions that we have seen time after time and there are much wider implications as a result of lockdown. We talked about the mental health pandemic that is with us and is going to be with us for some time. We have seen the economic damage that has been caused as a result of these lockdown actions and I think we really have to look at the bigger picture once we make these decisions and be ready from the range of impacts that come from them. Adam, let mejust remind you of the question. Should public sector workers get pay rises while thousands from the private sector are faced with unemployment? Well, I suppose politics and economics really is about priorities, isn’t it? I think it does say something about the government that the first area they look at when they are looking to make savings is, you know, public sector workers pay and the global poor. And, by the way, we are talking about a real terms cut, so let’s be clear about these public sector workers. I think it is precisely the wrong thing to say and do at this point, because we have had 13 years effectively off austerity, we made this mistake last time we had an economic crisis and in an economic crisis... This is a much larger economic crisis. Well, in terms of the situation that we are facing in unemployment, yes, but there was an economist 100 years ago who wrote a pamphlet, the consequences of the peace, John Maynard Keynes, and he said, when you’re faced with an economic crisis, precisely the lies thing you should do is to cutback on government spending. It sounds kind of implicitly sensible, doesn’t it? We have got no money because the economy is going down, therefore we will spend less, but governments have an absolute central role, which is unique in this circumstance, they are the only ones, when you’re in a deflationary spiral, it is only governments that can keep actually the economy going and then that works, by the way, for private sector workers and public sector workers. It is the mistake we made last time, after the last economic crisis, we went into austerity, which is why wages have stagnated, in the public sector in particular. What does that mean as well? We find it difficult to recruit nurses, social care workers, teachers etc, all the public services that we have realised in this pandemic that are absolutely critical in being the decent society that we want to be and are we saying, after all that, the first place we are going to cut is the pay of public sector workers? These are not the values that I would like to see from our government. Nadhim. Thank you. And, Janette, thank you for the question and it is actually... That is not true what you have just heard, so as far as nurses and doctors, there will be a pay rise, as well as for 2.1 million public sector workers who are on £24,000 or less a £250 pay rise. That is likely to be less than inflation. So that is a pay cut. It is still £250 additional, in a difficult time, which we have been discussing. If you take a look at inflation, it is not a pay rise. Let me make my point forJanette. For the private sector, and to the point that there are about, you’re absolutely right, Claire, one should not be divisive about these things. The national living wage will rise to £8 91, to support workers in the private sector, in the third sector as well, but how do you create more prosperity? This is what the Chancellor has tried to do. If you look at what he published with the statement, which is the national infrastructure strategy for next year, £100 billion of spending over five years, 600 billion, what does that mean? What does that mean to you in Swansea? Well, what it means is that in Swansea, as part of the city deal, there will be £150 million invested in Swansea, in part of that city deal, to create that prosperity, to create the economic recovery that Claire talks about. 50 two thirds of a trillion over five years of investment in infrastructure in our schools, hospitals, our rail, our digital infrastructure. Hang on, I think we have got a bit off the question here, haven’t we? Should public sector workers expect pay rises, when thousands in the private sector are faced with unemployment? If the question went round, Fiona, and it went from talking about pay rises in a difficult time of Corona, yes of course, we are making sure that nurses and doctors get the pay rises, that public sector workers on £24,000 or less get £250. It is a little bit awkward... MPs may be getting a pay rise of 4.1%. That’s wrong. I have been on record and said that already and if it does happen, I hope that IPSA changes that and I hope that the treat MPs in the same way that we are asking the public sector to contribute to the effort to get this country back on its feet. It is wrong. There are are a couple of hands up, I want to takejust before I move on. Phil. The books need to be balanced and there are difficult choices for politicians to make and I think Tanni alluded to it as I am going to now, who would be a politician in the situation with all the books to be balanced and everything else? Back to the question, should the public sector worker have a pay freeze? The private sector have been hit very hard, the public sector have been hit very hard, but the public sector workers have had their wages, they have been paid, albeit perhaps not as much as they would like and in our hearts, as Tanni said, they deserve more, but can we afford it? My children, my grandchildren and possibly my great grandchildren will have to be paying for this for many, many years to come and the policies that have to be embraced have to balance the books. Perhaps the Chancellor should have apologised before he made the statement, perhaps he should have said in a different way, but I do feel that the public sector workers, if they have been paid and they continue to be able to be paid, I think they have had a fair deal as much as possible in this horrible situation that we are in. Let us take another question from Shireen Al—Salihi. Is it right to cut up the foreign aid budget? Well, look, Nadhim, we are going to come to you on this, obviously. It is one of the toughest decisions we have had to make, Shireen, the Chancellor explained at the dispatch box, as did the Foreign Secretary today, that we will, as soon as we can, go back to the 0.7% of GNI on foreign aid. By the way, even at 0.5%, we are still only second of the G7 in terms of our development spending. I am very proud, because my department was responsible for the vaccines tax force, that we hosted the summit in the UK which raised eight point 8 billion and we are contributing 330 million a year to the Gavi vaccine initiative to vaccinate the poorest children in the world. We continue to play a leadership position in our overseas development investment and spending but also the 2A billion over the next four years going into the Ministry of Defence and making sure that our ability tojoin up both our overseas development and what we ran do for the rest of the world in terms of peacekeeping and every other part of the Foreign Office work in terms of the combination of Foreign Office leadership and development leadership is something we should all be proud of and I hope that as soon as we can and does fill was just saying balance the books and get back to the 0.7%. Adam. I think it is a very very sad move by the government and I think particularly at this time when developing countries are also struggling with this pandemic and all of the harms that flow from that and, you know, lam stmck by the contrast between the incoming Biden administration and thank God the political weather is changing there and they are talking about America showing global leadership, being a progressive force in the world again. Rejoining the WHO, supporting the climate change agreement and doing more... They don’t spend as much on aid. They are talking about going on the other direction, because they realise that America as one of the richest countries in the world has a responsibility and I think I would like us to be doing "I’M-F The Scandinavian countries aim for 1% of GDP which was the original target from the UN and to be going on the other direction I think it is a sad indictment of the values of this government once again. It is a percentage figure after all and I think it is absolutely important that we say, even at this difficult time, because it is globally a difficult time, we do have a responsibility, we are citizens of the world and we have to demonstrate that in the kind of decisions that we make. Shireen. Given that the defence budget has increased, that we can always pull billions out of the bag for war, for killing, for the renewal of Trident, wouldn’t that money now be better spent on giving our nurses 3 well earned pay rise? I think we should put welfare before warfare and I think we should put people before profit and if we stop selling arms to Saudi, countries like Yemen wouldn’t need our foreign aid and millions of civilians there, their suffering would ease. Shireen, we are giving nurses 3 pay rise, but... Very briefly, because I want to bring the audience in. The peacekeeping work around the world is important. You have made that point, thank you. Let us hear what our audience have to say. Yeah, the UK’s reputation as a global player would be threatened just as it takes on the chairmanship of the G7 summit and hosts the UN climate change conference next year by investing in these developing nations, the UK would help to develop these emerging markets and that investment would allow us to rate financial rewards, having close trading links with those nations. Also on the cusp of having a vaccine that will only be effective if we are able to distribute worldwide and have an effective programme worldwide will we be able to get on top of this pandemic. Stewart. We are now contributing about £20 billion a year as aid and that would be reduced to about {13.5 billion. We would still be in the top three or four contributors throughout the world. I think, Stewart, just to correct you, we would actually be giving less than that, but we would be the second largest giver of foreign aid in the G7. But do go on, make your point. Sorry, I stand corrected, but I think in view of what we said earlier about public sector pay and everybody who has to align themselves, I think we should consider that this is a sensible move to make. It can be reverted when circumstances improve and I do believe that a large percentage of the population of this country do believe that we actually contribute more than our fair share anyway. Michael]. Yeah, I understand to a certain extent why we’ve had to reduce the number, but I don’t, what I would like to see is, as this is supposedly a short—term reduction, is actually a fixed date as to when this number is to rise back again. And, Claire. I think I agree with most of the comments that have been said, but to use an aeroplane analogy, I think it is really important that we put our own oxygen mask on first. And I think that we do need to keep it in perspective. This is a cut and it’s not permanent. And it is going to be reinstated. But I do agree with Michael, it’s a case of, when will that happen? Tanni. I think it’s one of those questions that it’s very easy to give a definitive yes or no without exploring everything behind it. And you know, as a nation, I do think we have a responsibility to look to the rest of the world, as we have a responsibility to look after the most vulnerable we have in our society. But it’s actually quite a political term when you think about it. And it’s actually about politics. It’s about sub—politics. It’s about hard politics. It’s about influence. It is about peacekeeping. It’s about trying to encourage different countries to support us in lots of different ways. And I’d like to kind of have a more detailed conversation about what that aid means in lots of different ways. I think we need to think about, as everyone else has said, how quickly we can get back to where we are and where we spend the money that we save. Because we’ve all talked about how difficult economically we are at the moment. The other thing is, as far as I understand it, it’s got to be changed by legislation and that has got to go through both chambers, the Commons and the Lords. And that’s the chance to interrogate every single part of this and what the aid means, going forward. But I do think we have a responsibility to help other people. Claire. Ithink... I really agree with Tanni, a bit of the bigger picture and a bit more complicated. I think the idea that this cut means that you don’t care about the global poor is a misunderstanding. And I’m not defending the Tories’ cut because I actually have got a bigger question about aid anyway, and I always thought that their legislation to have the 0.7% had an element of kind of moral grandstanding that I found distasteful. Because I think that the way that you’re a global leader is not... and I think it lacks imagination that we think it’s only through aid. I mean, we need to have, and be encouraging countries to develop. I’ll tell you what’s really hit developing countries at the moment, it’s not this decision to cut the aid budget, but think about the garment workers in Bangladesh and the tourism industry in those developing countries. That Western decision, in my opinion, to have a disproportionate reaction to coronavirus has devastated their ability to have their own industries, their own autonomy and so on and so forth. So they’re suffering as a consequence of actions we do and you can’tjust say, oh, well, aid would have compensated for that, because it wouldn’t. Their own governments are also taking action against coronavirus. Yes, but in different ways. But I’m saying if you look actually at all of the global reports, they’ll say that the devastating impact of the West’s reaction of stopping people travel and tourism, as I say, but also the industries. And if we really want to do something, I think that we should have no tariffs on, for example, chocolate coming from Africa, parts of Africa, in post—Brexit Britain. There are all sorts of ways. In other words, I believe in more trade, not aid, if you want, but encouraging development. Rather than simply treating people as though they are going to have crumbs off the table of aid. We have to remember as well, it sounds very nice, but aid is quite contentious. It’s very political. Aid NGOs are like a big business, right? They’re like multinationals, a lot of them, they’re huge. It’s not just straightforwardly going to the global poor. So I want to be able to query that, to at least ask questions, to have a complicated and sophisticated conversation — I’m not being funny about it — without people thinking you want to kill off the global poor, because that is actually not right. And I think global Britain, I do like the fact that there’s been this attempt at saying that vaccinations will be shared. I thought one of the great things about the Oxford AstraZeneca thing was that vaccinations would go to those countries. So don’t let’s just see it as aid, because there is a slightly patronising aspect to that. If we think the only way that the global poor can ever stop being poor is if we give them hand—outs — usually with political strings, by the way. So, I would be having a bigger conversation about aid and it’s not about being little Britain and not helping people out, it’s about being appropriate about what you do in terms of global poverty. Vaughan. Well, this is a clear breach of a manifesto promise. The amount would, of course, be going down — because GDP is shrinking across the UK, we’d actually be providing less of a sum. This is a choice to have an even bigger cut to that budget. I don’t often agree with David Cameron, but I think he’s right on this. I think it’s the wrong time to cede part of our global leadership, it sends out the wrong signal about who we want to be in the UK. And this isn’t simply about hand—outs. I mean, I’ve been... As part of our much smaller Wales for Africa programme — I’ve been to Uganda, and I’ve seen what our development projects do, working together with local communities. Actually helping them to build and develop and deliver in a more sustainable way, and that has a real impact. And that benefits us as well, I think. In a time of more global uncertainty, what we can do to help other parts of the world become more stable in the way we use our budgets really does matter. And I don’t think you need to say we can’t help other vulnerable or poorer people unless we deal with our own first. Because actually, we are already told that you can’t help some people within our country without punishing others as well. It’s the wrong argument to have and, actually, we have enough resources in this country to look after our own people and to still maintain the level of global leadership and the commitments we have made and put into law. So I look forward to seeing what happens when the bill has to go through both Houses of Parliament because, as I say, it’s a direct breach of a manifesto commitment and I think it’s the wrong choice and it does say something about the values that drive this UK Government. I want to try and squeeze in one more question from Michael Brennan. Hello, thank you, Fiona. Coronavirus has led to all four nations taking their own approach to controlling the pandemic. Will this provide the ground that will support the notion of a Welsh Independence vote? Well, go on, Adam, you have a run—in at this first. Yeah, I mean, that’s something that has been a theme, hasn’t it, throughout the pandemic? Because we’ve seen the surging support, the highest ever level of support new for independence in Wales. That’s partly because I think of the contrast... Not for Plaid Cymru. I mean, support for independence is significantly higher than support for your party. Yeah, well, you’re right, it’s interesting. 50% of Labour support, they won’t be that pleased about this, but 50% of Labour supporters in some opinion polls are supporting independence. So there’s definitely something happening. And I think it’s partly the contrast between, as one of the audience members said, I think between the rather shambolic approach to the pandemic that we’ve seen sadly from the Westminster Government to do better, more consistent, coherent approach from the devolved administrations, including the Welsh Government. I think there’s a sense in Wales generally as well, as a nation, that we’ve done some incredible work together. The government, yes. The community. And we’ve shown as a small nation that we can do this. And there are many decisions that... As an independent country, we could have introduced Universal Basic Income, so those self—employed people that I’ve referred to wouldn’t have been left reeling. And I think people look at some of the small countries. We were talking of mass testing earlier, weren’t we? Look at Slovakia. Tested the entire nation. The first country in the world to do so. And look at those many success stories during the pandemic, both economically and in health terms, many of them have been small, independent countries. And I think people in Wales are inspired by that. You know, we need a bit of inspiration and hope, and I think independence is part of that feeling. Do you know what? As a country, we can do this. Vaughan. My friend is 30 today and I think on his 40th birthday will still be part of the UK. The prospect of that lessened, though, given the action of this Prime Minister. He is the biggest recruiting sergeant for the independence movement. And that is the way he’s gone about notjust this pandemic handling, the way he’s spoken about parts of the Union, his actions in office. And I think the real challenge here is if you do believe the union of the UK gives Wales the best chance, with a devolved national vote, to make our own choices, make our own decisions in a range of areas, but still benefit from being part of a wider union of countries then, actually, the way that this government has gone about a range of choices and the way that we have sometimes been treated with real contempt... For example, HS2 spend is counted as England and Wales, yet not a single inch of H52 track or spend is going to come to Wales. It’s a detriment to the Welsh economy. But this government decides that that’s actually England and Wales funds. That costs real money for people in Wales, a real detriment to infrastructure spend. So there’s a real challenge here in the tone and the performance of this government. If they’re serious about the union, they need to act like they’re a government before the whole of the United Kingdom and show more respect for people in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. And they can do something about that by taking a very different approach to the Internal Markets Bill, which is a direct assault on devolution and Welsh farmers are going to find they are going to pay the price for the choices this Government has made. Because the betrayal in the current statement from the Chancellor yesterday does show a significant cut in money going to rural communities, and a straightforward power grab for devolved responsibilities. It’s absolutely not the way to safeguard the union of the United Kingdom. Tanni. I was born and spent sort of the vast majority of my life living in Wales. The only reason I left was because of my husband’s job. And it’s been interesting living in England and then seeing the reaction in Wales and Scotland and Northern Ireland to devolution and the increase of desire for it. Ithink, you know, I’d be really upset for the UK to split up, but I think that’s partly being 3 GB athlete and those things as well. But I think what people want to feel is connected to their decision—makers. And one thing I’m really conscious of where I live now... And, you know, Iwork in the Westminster bubble in London, which is a bubble. You know, we are a long way from London. Economically, socially. Pre—lockdown, it was cheaper to fly to Europe than it was to get a train to London. And so, I think people want to feel connected, they want to feel in control, they want to feel engaged, that their vote makes a difference. And I think this is a problem for all of British politics, in terms of how people are disengaged. I go to a lot of schools and young people say, I hate politics. And I go, no, you might not like watching Prime Minister’s Questions. For a moment there, Tanni, I thought you might say Question Time, but you held back, well done! I almost had a panic there! So did I! You know, if we don’t engage people and we don’t have people thinking that their vote has a say... And we know that young people, if they don’t vote in the first general election after they’re 18, their chance of voting will drop again and again and again, and then they become even less engaged. So I think what people want is, they want to feel that their politicians are listening to them, that they understand them, that they are not disconnected. And that is why I think we’re seeing a greater call for independence. So, Nadhim, Vaughan Gething saying that BorisJohnson has proven to be the best recruiting sergeant for independence in Wales. We had the SNP on last week saying the same thing for Scotland. Well, I don’t agree. I think devolution worked for Boris when he was London Mayor by focusing on what Londoners wanted, which is better security, better housing, cleaner air. And I think devolution needs to be seen, I think to Tanni’s point, people need to see it working. We’re much stronger together. Vaughan talks about the internal market. The internal market is the most successful market probably in the world. Wales sells to the rest of the United Kingdom... But he’s talking about the Internal Markets Bill. That’s my point, exactly. Wales sells to the rest of the UK about 30 billion and buys back about 32 billion from the rest of the UK. Those companies in Wales need to be able to sell that freely without restrictions. And buy without restriction. That’s why the Internal Markets Bill is so important, Fiona. And actually, Wales is £5 billion, you know, additional spending through the pandemic because of the United Kingdom being together and stronger. The devolved administrations, £16 billion of additional spending. That’s a good thing. I talked to my colleagues from Wales, Ken Skates and Fiona Hyslop and Diane Dodds in Northern Ireland, almost on a weekly basis during the crisis. We have an excellent working relationship. I think, actually, what people in Swansea, in Glasgow and in London needs to see is their politicians working much closer together in this difficult time because we’re much stronger united. Claire, we are very nearly out of time, but I just want to give you a chance with this question. The fact that coronavirus has led to the four nations taking their own approach in terms of controlling coronavirus. I think it’s been divisive. I don’t actually think it’s been helpfulfor the union. I think it’s also created a sense of confusion about the United Kingdom myself. I think it’s wrong to suggest that if you’ve got politicians physically closer, that they’re going to be more in touch with you. Let me assure you, as somebody from North Wales, having the Senedd in Cardiff, there is a clique of people around the Senedd. That doesn’t mean that people in North Wales feel like they’re closer. It’s a political question, not a physical one. And I think that there’s been a huge amount of problems with the Welsh administration. School education standards have been abysmal under the present administration. I was yesterday in the House of Lords looking at the mental health legislation where, thank goodness, the Coronavirus Act which gave the power to section people with just one doctor and for a long time, which should never have been there in the first place, has been repealed. Wales have kept it on. I mean, don’t ask me why because it’s absolutely draconian. We had Mark Drakeford telling us what was essential and nonessential shopping. No, I don’t necessarily think that the handling of the coronavirus. .. And by the way, all sorts of problems of testing at the beginning, and they did... I’m going to have to hurry you, I’m sorry, Claire, we’re running out of time. ..care homes in Wales. So, yeah, I think it’s much more complicated than saying, oh, there you go, itjust shows Wales can go on its own, then. No, it doesn’t. It needs to be interrogated and they need to be held to account for the mistakes they’ve made. That’s why we have elections. Exactly. I’m going to end it here, simply because we are running out of time. I’m so sorry because I can see this could go backwards and forwards for quite some time. But our time is up, our hour is up. Tonight, our questions came from Swansea. Next week, we’ll be joined by an audience in Bath and, the week after that, Chelmsford. So, do get in touch, comejoin the debate. You can apply on the Question Time website, and you fill in the form there, and let’s see if you can come and be part of our audience. We would love to see you. Adrian Chiles is coming up on Radio 5 Live with Question Time Extra Time, as always, with his guests. You can see on the screen how to get in touch and put your views there. But for now, thank you very much to the panel here in the studio and to Vaughan and Tanni forjoining me down the line. From our audience in Swansea, thank you very much for being part of the programme. And of course, to you at home, thank you very much for watching. From Question Time, bye—bye. APPLAUSE