Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Grant Shapps, Secretary of State for Transport and former chairman of the Conservative Party. Laboqu former chairman of the Conservative Party. Labour’s newly appointed Shadow Chancellor Anneliese Dodds. jeane Shadow Chancellor Anneliese Dodds. Jeane Freeman, the Scottish Government Secretary for health joining us from Edinburgh. Leading UK scientist, former president of the Royal Society and chief executive of the Francis Crick Institute, Sir Paul Nurse, and George Osborne, editor of the Evening Standard in London and former Chancellor of the Exchequer. Good evening, welcome to my guests here in the studio, socially distance of course. Jeane Freeman, distance of course. jeane Freeman, thank you for distance of course. Jeane Freeman, thank you forjoining us from thank you for joining us from Edinburgh. thank you forjoining us from Edinburgh. And we have no studio audience here for the reasons we all know, but this time we have taken pre-recorded know, but this time we have taken pre—recorded questions from Leeds pre-recorded questions from Leeds and we pre—recorded questions from Leeds and we have been hearing from you via social media, and I will be feeding those in as we go throughout the programme. You can continue to the programme. You ran continue to join in on social the programme. You can continue to join in on social media. Let’s take our first join in on social media. Let’s take ourfirst question, join in on social media. Let’s take our first question, which join in on social media. Let’s take ourfirst question, which is join in on social media. Let’s take our first question, which is from Hannah Robinson. Britain is set to have the worst death toll in Europe from Cobh at 19, were a decade of austerity has left us unprepared. There will be an economic cost as a result of this crisis. How will you ensure it is not paid for by the poorest in society with further austerity measures? There will be a big bill at the end of this, Grant. First of all, I want to caution and looking at the figures we are all aware of coming out every day, at the press conferences, and making an assumption about where that puts us in the global league table. There was a good article by Professor was a good artida by Professor David was a good article by Professor David Siegel today in the Guardian, where he explained why you cannot do those comparisons. Hang on a second, the reason Hannah is making the comparison because you show the comparison herause you show the graphs at the comparison because you show the graphs at the press conference. Today as yesterday it showed Britain on course, by the looks of things, to have the worst death toll in Europe. You would know about this. These are difficult to compare, so we have to be careful about it. It would be fair to say we are not doing very well. We could get into a discussion about the statistics, but discussion about the statistic, but my point is we discussion about the statistics, but my point is we need to judge it at the end of this when we can look at the end of this when we ran look at the excess the end of this when we can look at the excess deaths in any given year, which I think is the scientific way. Do you accept what he is saying? That we are not doing very well? when you That we are not doing very well? When you look at where we started on when you look at where we started on this, it has When you look at where we started on this, it has been said at the beginning that a worst—case scenario beginning that a worst-case scenario is half a beginning that a worst—case scenario is half a million deaths. And we have not seen what we saw in other countries. We saw those pictures which we looked at in horror where Italy was ahead of us and people were literally on the floor in were literally on the ﬂoor in hospitals were literally on the floor in hospitals or outside. We built eight Nightingale hospitals in next to no time. Today capacity in urgent care, time. Today capacity in urgent rare, critical time. Today capacity in urgent care, critical care rather, is about 50% critical rare rather, is about 5096 availabla, critical care rather, is about 50% available, and numbers in critical availabla, and numbers in critical rare are falling. available, and numbers in critical care are falling. Lots of things rare are falling. Lots of things like that, care are falling. Lots of things like that, and bringing in incubators, have gone very much a plan thanks to the enormous efforts of everybody in the NHS and beyond. So why are our debts so high? I differ of course always to medical and scientific advice and that is what the government has been doing all the way through. The scientific advisers are saying there are lots of reasons because of demographics, of reasons because of demographic, age, obesity of reasons because of demographics, age, obesity plays a part, the health of the population. If you look at, for example, the south—west look at, for example, the south-west of the UK look at, for example, the south—west of the UK and down in Cornwall, the deaths are relatively low, whereas in London at the beginning, it is a much more dense and compact city, they were much higher. There were a of factors, but the key factor to look at at the end is the excess deaths over a normal year and I encourage people to look at the article in the Guardian where the professor goes into detail. Since we have got you here, Sir Paul Nurse, what is your view on this? This is only part of Hannah’s question. It is difficult to make comparisons between different countries, they count deaths in different ways. We will have to look at it in the end, but we are right to think we could be doing better. There are various reasons which I hope we will explore duﬂng reasons which I hope we will explore during the programme. What do you during the programme. what do you think they are? during the programme. What do you think they are? I would start with the fact that we were totally unprepared for it and we should have been prepared for it. The fact was there was a review of the functioning of the NHS, how it would work in a pandemic, it happened to be an influenza one, it was never be an inﬂuenza one, it was never published, it be an influenza one, it was never published, it was three years ago. And we didn’t do well, we failed. Was there any action? I did not see any action, it was not even published. Austerity was mentioned. Was the NHS well enough funded to actually take that report seriously and lead when the pandemic took place in a really getting on the front foot? We have been playing catch up for this entire pandemic. when it is catch up for this entire pandemic. When it is analysed we will see that when it is analysed we will see that we did When it is analysed we will see that we did not do very well. But you are right, we have to look at the figures carefully and it is still out there exactly where we will be, but it is our lack of preparation which was the start of our trouble. which was the start of our troubla. I don’t which was the start of our trouble. I don’t want to say everything is perfect and there is nothing we could have done differently, don’t be ridiculous. But it is the case in be ridiculous. But it is the use in some of be ridiculous. But it is the case in some of the best health care systems some of the best health rare systems in the world, some of the best health care systems in the world, Italy and Spain for example, they had worse problems. The preparation that was taking place for a pandemic, an ordinary inﬂuenza place for a pandemic, an ordinary influenza pandemic, whereas what we inﬂuenza pandemic, whereas what we have got is influenza pandemic, whereas what we have got is something very global in nature which has led to big nature which has lad to big shortages nature which has led to big shortages in things like PPE and the rest of it. Given all those circumstances, and we will have to judge this at the end, but given those circumstances the way this country has responded has been remarkable and impressive in many remarkabla and impressive in many ways, with remarkable and impressive in many ways, with those ventilators being offered up by 12,500 companies coming forward to see how they can coming forward to see how they ran help, and a lot coming forward to see how they can help, and a lot of those officers have been taken up with Lord Dyson behind it. Please call me Paul. I think there were some very simple things we should have had. A warehouse or two full protective clothing. That would have been simple to do. That was really not right. just to simple to do. That was really not right. Just to understand the scale right. just to understand the scale of this thing, right. Just to understand the scale of this thing, we probably had a warehouse or two, but what we needed was a brilliant pieces delivered. Including single gloves. Yes, but Including singla gloves. Yes, but also pairs of Including single gloves. Yes, but also pairs of gloves and four gloves counted as one. Let me bring in Anneliese. Very few people would say the preparation was there to the degree it should have been. But to be honest with you, I am not here to put blame on anyone, I am here to 55V put blame on anyone, I am here to say what ran we put blame on anyone, I am here to say what can we do to fix this? My say what ran we do to fix this? My goodness, we say what can we do to fix this? My goodness, we need to fix it. We need to deal with the blockages and need to listen to what the people on the front line are saying to us and take action. For example, around the enormous shortages that still exist in protective equipment, and we saw that on the Panorama programme recently, there are shortages. We set out a whole range of things that we think need to be done. Around testing we just missed the target set out before. I will not testing we just missed the target set out before. I will notjump up set out before. I will not jump up and down set out before. I will notjump up and down and say isn’t that an incredible thing? We have to fix it. It was that 100,000 target. To be clear, there is now over 90,000 test capacity. 81,500 tests were carried out today. We will see tomorrow whether we have met that target. There are more labs coming in and the Cambridge super testing lab does not open until Monday. You have got quite a lot to say on testing, which we will come to in a moment. Let’s deal with the other half of Hannah’s question. (“an deal with the other half of Hannah’s question. Can you ensure the economic cost of this crisis is not paid for by the poorest in society with further austerity measures? What Hannah highlighted in her what Hannah highlighted in her question What Hannah highlighted in her question was the decision is taken over the last ten years have left us unprepared. If you look at social rare, we had unprepared. If you look at social care, we had 120,000 vacancies in rare, we had 120,000 vacancies in social rare care, we had 120,000 vacancies in social care even before this crisis social rare even before this crisis started. social care even before this crisis started. We have been talking about the decisions taken in the NHS because of a lack of funding. We did because of a lack offunding. We did have that because of a lack of funding. We did have that additional funding in the 20005, we did not have additional funding from 2010 onwards. Preparedness seemed to slip off the agenda. We cannot be in that situation again. Are you saying this is partly George was my fault? He was Chancellor. I think the statistics do make the case very statistis do make the use very dearty. I statistis do make the use very dearty. lam statistics do make the case very clearly. I am not going to point the dearty. I am not going to point the finger, but we clearly. I am not going to point the finger, but we had that lack of preparedness and lack of resilience in our public services. But this is also about households’ financial resilience also about households’ financial resilience as well. 9% of our resilience as well. 996 of our population resilience as well. 9% of our population are due to be unemployed. We entered this crisis with a quarter of families not giving having £100 of savings after the longest squeeze in living standards that our country has seen for eight generations, the slowest recovery after a financial crisis for hundreds of years. That is something that we cannot repeat. George, your record is that we rannot repeat. George, your record is being that we cannot repeat. George, your record is being called into question record is being railed into question here, and in record is being called into question here, and in terms of Hannah’s question how can we ensure the cost question how ran we ensure the cost of all this question how can we ensure the cost of all this is not paid for by further austerity measures. Do you think you are partly responsible for the situation the NHS is in? Then how do we get out of this? There is a terrible trap in the British political debate that somehow Britain is unique and we are either uniquely bad or uniquely good at things. In all the elements of Hannah’s question Britain is experiencing things that other countries like us are experiencing. First of all in the pandemic itself, we are in the middle of the pack. We are not as good as the government claims, dearty, are not as good as the government claims, clearly, but nor are not as good as the government claims, clearly, but norare are not as good as the government claims, clearly, but nor are we as claims, dearty, but nor are we as bad as claims, clearly, but nor are we as bad as what some of the critics say. bad as what some of the critis say. We have bad as what some of the critics say. We have not had the testing as quickly as we would have liked, we went into the lockdown too slowly. But the hospitals have not fallen over and the capacity has been built and people are getting the ventilators when they need them. It is a different story in social care. is a different story in social rare. Even in is a different story in social care. Even in social care other countries Even in social rare other countries in Europe are Even in social care other countries in Europe are having terrible problems and things like protective equipment, Germany is doing very well, but the doctors are protesting they did not have the protective equipment. I think we are somewhere in the middle. In terms of preparedness we were not as well—prepared as we should have been well-prepared as we should have been for a pandemic well—prepared as we should have been for a pandemic that was not a pandemic flu. All the contingency pandemic ﬂu. All the contingency planning I pandemic flu. All the contingency planning I saw many years ago was about pandemic flu. That was not about pandemic ﬂu. That was not just a bunch of about pandemic flu. That was not just a bunch of politicians thinking about what we had to prepare for, it was the expert community as well. There ran was the expert community as well. There can be serious lessons, but There ran be serious lessons, but again no country There can be serious lessons, but again no country was particularly again no country was particularty well again no country was particularly well prepared in the West. Finally on austerity, the last time I was on Question Time was ten years ago and I was the Shadow Chancellor and we were having the same debate. Austerity in this country and elsewhere and in every other country was the consequence of a massive financial crash. That is what blew financial crash. That is what blur the financial crash. That is what blew the finances of every major economy. There is a basic truth about economics which is in the end you economic which is in the end you ran economics which is in the end you can borrow economic which is in the end you ran borrow your economics which is in the end you can borrow your way through the ran borrow your way through the emergency, can borrow your way through the emergency, but in the end if your country is poorer than it was, and that sadly will be the case for us, that sadly will be the use for us, we will that sadly will be the case for us, we will have to face very questions, whether it be Anneliese or Rishi Sunak as Chancellor, about how you cut your doth. Sunak as Chancellor, about how you cut your cloth. You can increase cut your doth. You ran increase taxes cut your cloth. You can increase taxes because you want to spend more on the NHS, or you will have to keep taxes as they are and spend less. That is just a basic rule about That is just a basic mla about countrrs That is just a basic rule about country’s finances. I faced these countrrs finances. I faced these questions country’s finances. I faced these questions many years ago and I believe we did it in a way that kept people in work. In that government peopla in work. In that government more jobs people in work. In that government more jobs were created than any government in British history. And I saying they were easy decisions? Am I saying that the poor and vulnerable are immune when the economy crashes? Of course not. They are often the most exposed and you have to do everything you can to have to do everything you ran to help them have to do everything you can to help them through. But to think there is money when there is not is a regular fault in there is money when there is not is a regularfault in politics. Are you a regular fault in politic. Are you saying there a regularfault in politics. Are you saying there will be austerity Mark two? I do not think it will be the same. But the drop is deeper because we have shut same. But the drop is deeper because we have shutdown same. But the drop is deeper because we have shut down the economy. But I think the recovery will be more quickly. Financial crises in the banks have been long and drawn out. Much of Europe was only recovering from the crash a couple of years ago that happened a decade ago. Recovery will take place more quickly, but the basic truth is our country, because of this virus, is not as rich as we thought it would be, and rich as we thought it would he, and a bunch of rich as we thought it would be, and a bunch of people queueing up saying we want to pay everyone more, we want a universal Basic income, we will spend more money on public services, I would love that to be the rase, I services, I would love that to be the case, I love this country, but the use, I love this country, but the truth the rase, I love this country, but the truth is you the case, I love this country, but the truth is you have to pay for it and you ran be the truth is you have to pay for it and you can be honest and say taxes and you ran be honest and say taxes will go up, and I and you can be honest and say taxes will go up, and I was the person who put up taxes like VAT, or you say, I’m afraid we have to cut our cloth I’m afraid we have to cut our doth accordingly. I’m afraid we have to cut our cloth accordingly. That debate is only just starting in British politics. just starting in British politic. It is not just starting in British politics. It is not happening now because we are in the middle of a pandemic. I suspect the politics of the next suspect the politic of the next general suspect the politics of the next general election will be all about the economy, the economy has moved centre stage into British politics. You have been listening patiently in Edinburgh, how are we going to pay for it? Politicians, political leaders, their starting point has to be a cause of considerable regret. be a cause of considerabla regret. MY be a cause of considerable regret. My second point is, I don’t think any political leader or politician in Scotland or the UK should ever claim that we are confident that we have got everything right so far, all that we will get everything right. We said at the outset, this virus is about 130 days old in terms of our emerging knowledge and understanding of it and things change and we have to be able to change our response and our approach. There have been real positives in terms of how our staff in the NHS and social care have in the NHS and social rare have responded in in the NHS and social care have responded in creating that significant additional capacity. Our intensive care capacity is a quarter intensive rare capacity is a quarter of what it intensive care capacity is a quarter of what it is capable of. Our caregivers have to be thanked from the bottom of our hearts for everything they have done and the sacrifices they have made to get us to this place where we are suppressing the virus. Not enough suppressing the vims. Not enough vet. suppressing the vims. Not enough yet, but we suppressing the virus. Not enough yet, but we are suppressing it. Do you think Scotland could have taken a different path at any stage, jeane? I a different path at any stage, Jeane? I think Scotland’s approaching this, my approach and the approach of our First Minister, Anneliese Dodds touched on it, in facing a pandemic, ordinary political disagreements have to be put to one side. I undoubtedly have significant political differences with significa nt political differences with Matt significant political differences with Matt Hancock, my counterpart for the health service in England. I believe in independence and he absolutely doesn’t. But we have to find ways to work together because that is our best option for dealing with this pandemic. Notwithstanding that we have a responsibility here in Scotland. I do for our health service, but where I think the evidence takes me to a place where the decision is right for the people of Scotland, for the health and social care services in Scotland social rare services in Scotland would social care services in Scotland would differ from any of the other four nations, I clearly set that out four nations, I dearty set that out because four nations, I clearly set that out because that is where my responsibility lies. I think we have had some preparedness, we do have a national distribution service to order, secure and distribute PPE. So there are differences between how our health services run between our health services mn between England, for our health services run between England, for example, and Scotland. jeane, getting England, for example, and Scotland. Jeane, getting to the second half of jeane, getting to the second half of the question, Jeane, getting to the second half of the question, when it comes to paying for this at the end of the day, how do you see it happening? I think Hannah has touched on an important point. One of the key principles, if you like, we set out in the document we published last week which is really the beginning of a conversation with the people of Scotland. It sets out the framework of how we will make decisions about, not only what steps what we might ease coming out of the current lockdown, but also how we plan ahead for Scotland’s future to renew our country, that includes our economy. But part of that is to say that whilst this is a terrible situation and we are by no means through it yet. and we are by no means through it yet, we also ran and we are by no means through it yet, we also can see that in that yet, we also ran see that in that situation yet, we also can see that in that situation some things have been thrown up, the key workers, workers in the health and social care in the health and social rare services, in the health and social care services, delivering food, working in supermarkets, keeping the basics in supermarkets, keeping the basis of our in supermarkets, keeping the basics of our infrastructure running are of our infrastmclure mnning are actually some of our infrastructure running are actually some of the worst paid peopla in actually some of the worst paid people in our society. And if we are peopla in our society. And if we are going to people in our society. And if we are going to maximise the chance to renew our country in Scotland, and I hope in the rest of the UK, we need to take hope in the rest of the UK, we need hhha hope in the rest of the UK, we need to take a serious look at how we want to address any inequality of income, any inequalities of advantage and that does include looking at the practicalities of a Universal Basic Income. In Scotland, we don’t have the powers that would allow us to introduce that. But it will be a conversation that we will want to have. Let’s put some of that to the panel. The questions about austerity, will we see a new period of austerity? The Prime Minister at the press conference today, the first one obviously since he has been unwell. He said the economy would bounce back strongly and then he said I have never liked the term austerity and it will be part of our approach. Do you want to enlighten us about this a bit more? The first thing I want to say, I agree a lot with the way the devolved administrations have worked on this, it has been more Cross Country across party as well. I speak to my opposite number quite frequently, including yesterday. 0K, opposite number quite frequently, including yesterday. OK, but in terms of what was said today? I think the word you attach is the important thing. Absolutely, he said I have never liked that word. How you climb out of it is the interesting thing and the important thing. As George has said, we all know you cannot forever spend money you have not got. On the other hand this could be more of the V shaped recovery we hope it is, in other words we went into a very steeply as the economy shut words we went into a very steeply as the economy shutdown, we may open the economy shut down, we may open “P the economy shut down, we may open up the economy the economy shutdown, we may open up the economy and come out of it. I don’t think as a straight line going “P don’t think as a straight line going up but not as a ten year recovery programme. It is undeniable there will be a new debt are formed by it. I would venture to say the well’s I would venture to say the Hell’s attitude I would venture to say the well’s attitude towards this, because it has happened on a global basis, may be different to the financial crisis of 2008 where the problems were banks in danger of going bust. I think the lending markets, the global markets may now accept a certain level of debts. That is an unknown, as yet and we will have to see where we are up to. We will not know for some months to come, may be more like a year or so, who knows? How the economy has come back out of this and until we know that we cannot judge this and until we know that we cannotjudge the situation. If cannot judge the situation. If austerity is cannotjudge the situation. If austerity is not going to be part, a tax rise might be? What we have to tax rise might be? what we have to do is tax rise might be? What we have to do is consider it for what it is, which is a crisis which, rather like a war, you have no choice but to pay for. But as we saw after the war is this country has gone through, the last war, we came back and became a stronger country and we can do that stronger country and we ran do that again. I stronger country and we ran do that again. Iwant stronger country and we ran do that again. I want to stronger country and we can do that again. I want to respond to Hannah’s original point, which is we will not do the kind of, as she said, concerned about people who are the least well off. This government in particular were elected only in December on the basis of left behind communities, the town is world had moved on without them and a lot of my work to do with the Northern Powerhouse and the Cabinet with the levelling up agenda and we will not forget that. Today, I have been working on that agenda. When we come working on that agenda. when we come out of this, things working on that agenda. When we come out of this, things like reconnecting communities by reversing those Beeching cuts to railways and that sort of thing, will be absolutely front and centre of our programme. We should urge a little caution that we are just going to recover that quickly. We really don’t know how this virus is going to behave. We hope we will come out quickly, but we shouldn’t assume that. We may have a recurring infection, we may be dealing with something that takes a number of years. I wouldn’t, something that takes a number of years. Iwouldn’t, with something that takes a number of years. I wouldn’t, with complete years. Iwouldn’t, with complete confidence, years. I wouldn’t, with complete confidence, think we will bounce back quicker than the financial crisis. We have to be careful about that? It is clear it is going to reshape our economy, ways of working. This has damaged is worse than the financial crisis and Keir Starmer talked about tax rises as a “Y Starmer talked about tax rises as a way out of this? George suggested there would be two choices about how much more you tax and how much less much more you tax and how much lass you spend. But much more you tax and how much less you spend. But there are two other big choices. One of them goes to the heart of what Paul big choices. One of them goes to the heart of what Pauljust said which heart of what Paul just said which is how heart of what Pauljust said which is how we are going to boost demand as we start to climb out of this. Because we have seen people scaling right back on their spending, we will have to give people that confidence again and what we saw, unfortunately after 2010 was a reduction in the confidence in many areas, are dropping off in demand. That meant the economic cake was That meant the economic rake was smaller That meant the economic cake was smaller than it needed to be so we have to make sure we have the growth. Secondly, we need to take decisions about where those cuts in services or increases in tax fall. If we look at what happened between 2010 and 2019, the worst of 10% of 2010 and 2019, the worst of 101: of peopla with 2010 and 2019, the worst of 10% of people with children saw their incomes fall by 20%, according to incomes fall by 2096, according to the ISS. incomes fall by 20%, according to the ISS. The best of 10% of people, the ISS. The best of 1096 of peopla, as a the ISS. The best of 10% of people, as a result of successive people, they only so that falling by 2%. they only so that falling by 296. There they only so that falling by 2%. There was a distributional choice taken by successive Conservative ministers. I am taken by successive Conservative ministers. lam not taken by successive Conservative ministers. I am not saying this to make a party political point but we need a new settlement after this. Not just need a new settlement after this. Notjust because those of us who Not just because those of us who don’t Notjust because those of us who don’t like that level of inequality and that level of deprivation, that being morally abhorrent, but because it has meant we have so many people it has meant we have so many peopla who are in it has meant we have so many people who are in such a difficult precarious financial situation now, that as they full into unemployment they don’t have the ballast. If we have continued disruption, we cannot have continued disruption, we rannot have that huge have continued disruption, we cannot have that huge black people in the have that huge black peopla in the British have that huge black people in the British population who are in such a difficult and economic situation. Talking of people talking unemployment, let’s hear Talking of people talking unemployment, let’s hearfrom unemployment, let’s hear from another unemployment, let’s hearfrom another person who contacted us. I mn a another person who contacted us. I run a medium—sized brewery business nm a medium-sized brewery business alongside run a medium—sized brewery business alongside working in the music industry. Both these professions have been severely disrupted by the measures needed to flatten the infection curve. The current government backed plan to keep us aﬂoat government backed plan to keep us afloat has been very welcome. When aﬂoat has been very welcome. when many afloat has been very welcome. When many restrictions live, help to keep small venues, pubs and breweries will be needed until they are profitable again? The government made this grand gesture of paying in terms of furloughed staff and it has been welcome, some have fallen through the middle and we have heard from people who are getting nothing. from peopla who are getting nothing. How do you from people who are getting nothing. How do you get out of that and keep those businesses afloat is not necessarily straightforward? I obviously take Paul’s point, we will have to live with this virus for as far as I ran have to live with this virus for as far as I can see for a considerable far as I ran see for a considerabla period of time far as I can see for a considerable period of time until the vaccine is discovered and then applied to the population if it is. That is going to require different ways of working and we will have to find ways for the entertainment industry and the brewing industry to get back to some kind of life. And I think the thinking this country will go back to the world February 2020 is big mistake. It is going to be a new world we live in. Some of those people who were furloughed are not peopla who were furloughed are not going to have people who were furloughed are not going to have jobs to go people who were furloughed are not going to havejobs to go back people who were furloughed are not going to have jobs to go back to. people who were furloughed are not going to havejobs to go back to. I going to have jobs to go back to. I have going to havejobs to go back to. I have been a going to have jobs to go back to. I have been a big going to havejobs to go back to. I have been a big supporter of what Rishi Sunak has done, to throw money at the problem. You fix the roof as the sun is shining so you can deal the sun is shining so you ran deal with a the sun is shining so you can deal with a storm like this. So you have the credibility as a country and the financial markets to go and borrow. The government is borrowing, I reckon, one in every £3 we are reckon, one in every B we are spending on reckon, one in every £3 we are spending on every nurse, police officer, on every furloughed person, on the pensions they are paying. We are borrowing a huge amount and we need to maintain international confidence particularly when the confidence particularty when the Bank confidence particularly when the Bank of England stops printing money to pay for all this, which is what is happening at the moment. The issue of how you will allow the economy to regenerate and withdraw some of these schemes is going to be very fraught and very contested in British politics. I say this now as British politic. I say this now as an editor British politics. I say this now as an editor and an observer rather than a participant. The furlough scheme, has been a life—saver than a participant. The furlough scheme, has been a life—saverfor scheme, has been a life-saver for millions of scheme, has been a life—saverfor millions of people and people in my millions of peopla and peopla in my company have millions of people and people in my company have been furloughed to save the company and their company have been furloughed to save the company and theirjobs. But the truth is, if you let that furlough in place for years and years, there will be people who frankly were unemployed because they were never going to go back to a job but weren’t released into the labour market to try and find a new weren’t released into the labour market to try and find a newjob. market to try and find a new job. That is market to try and find a newjob. That is what we need to do for them now and provide that support. But if you allow it to carry on for ever, and I am talking not about this year but the years ahead, you have left them in limbo. The same is true of them in limbo. The same is tme of some of them in limbo. The same is true of some of these companies that are getting loans, and we all hope they come back, but not all of them will. We have to be honest about that. We need to start to have the discussion, even though it is not an issue we need to confront right now. If you keep basically, companies that have gone bust alive with a credit line, you are not allowing the peopla credit line, you are not allowing the people involved in that company the peopla involved in that company to go off and the people involved in that company to go off and do other things, create new companies and so on. It is a very tough set of choices the government, and indeed the opposition that wants to be the government, are going to have to confront. just government, are going to have to confront. Just saying we have thrown confront. just saying we have thrown all this money confront. Just saying we have thrown all this money at it, go on throwing the money at it and go on borrowing the money, is not realistic. I am all for firing up the money, is not realistic. I am all forfiring up the the money, is not realistic. I am all for firing up the enterprise and getting investment into the country, because the one thing I think this generation of politicians is going to have to deal with, very sadly, which my government I was part of didn’t have to deal with, is unemployment. That, we have not seen in this country on a large scale for many decades. That is very scarring, many decades. That is very starring, "TY many decades. That is very starring, very damaging many decades. That is very scarring, very damaging for the people involved, families and the communities. Really, that is another issue that will come back centrestage. Ultimately, you need successful businesses that want to employ people have had the capacity employ peopla have had the capacity to employ people have had the capacity to employ people and they have to to employ peopla and they have to allow to employ people and they have to allow those businesses that will not succeed, sadly, to close. You have to allow peopla succeed, sadly, to close. You have to allow people who are furloughed, to allow peopla who are furloughed, and I am to allow people who are furloughed, and I am not talking about this year, but the years ahead, who furloughed and will not return to the job they had to go and get the new the job they had to go and get the newjob. That is going to be the new job. That is going to be the most newjob. That is going to be the most difficult decisions that these guys are going to have to make. Does the Treasury have an exit strategy when it comes to furloughing? furloughing? There is a huge amount of uncertainty and we all understand that, but we have the plans set out at the moment, which is the furlough continues until at the moment, which is the furlough continues untilJune. Are you continues until june. Are you looking at continues untilJune. Are you looking at extending that? Wait until we see what happens at the time. It will be extended, there is no way it will be coming to an end. It is an expensive scheme. This depends largely on ourselves and how we deal with the lockdown and keeping to these social distancing measures as we go forward. What we measures as we go forward. what we do not measures as we go forward. What we do not know is how the Oxford University tie—up with AstraZeneca University tie-up with AstraZenera that we University tie—up with AstraZeneca that we learnt about today is going to do, if indeed the Tesco well, on the vaccine. That could be a complete game changer. That is going to be some time off. When it comes to be some time off. when it comes to the to be some time off. When it comes to the hospitality industry in particular, how will they begin to get back on their feet? George is right, there has been a huge amount of initial assistance, £25,000 grants, not loans, provided to businesses at the stage and they are not paying any business rates. Half the businesses in Britain will not be paying business rates, including hospitality, this year. We cannot hospitality, this year. We rannot put the tart hospitality, this year. We cannot put the cart before the horse. First put the tart before the horse. First of all we put the cart before the horse. First of all we have to see the all—important art rate, which we all-important art rate, which we will be hearing all—important art rate, which we will be hearing much more about, come down. We know it is between 0.6 and 0.9 and that will enable us and 0.9 and that will enabla us through the and 0.9 and that will enable us through the plan released next week to tweak social distancing, and there are many different aspects to this. Cleariy there are many different aspects to this. Clearly you do not go straight this. Cleariy you do not go straight from this. Clearly you do not go straight from where we are today to pubs and clubs being open and that problem dubs being open and that problem being clubs being open and that problem being resolved. Will you help keep being resolved. will you help keep pubs and being resolved. Will you help keep pubs and breweries alive? We want to try and keep the economy intact so if we are able to defeat this thing quickly that they are still there. What quickly that they are still there. what you quickly that they are still there. What you are inviting me to do is what you are inviting me to do is guess. just What you are inviting me to do is guess. Just answer the question. guess. just answer the question. Nobody ran guess. Just answer the question. Nobody can see the future of the Nobody ran see the future of the virus in Nobody can see the future of the virus in the same way you or I did not see it coming in the first place. Another question from John Chadwick. If the government does not know who is carrying the virus in our communities, how does the government know where and when to lift restrictions on movement? Paul? This is a very critical point. The only tool we have in our armoury at this moment is testing, testing, testing, and the appropriate changes in how society works which is built on that. Critical to the nation’s response to the pandemic is testing. Was it put in place properly? Was it Was it put in place property? Was it put in place Was it put in place properly? Was it put in place rapidly enough? What is put in place rapidly enough? what is your answer to put in place rapidly enough? What is your answer to that? My answer is I think we certainly could have done better. We were not prepared for it, as I said. Policy that was followed, a mixture of political and scientific and medical advice working together, decided to invest in large mega labs and these labs will be absolutely essential, but because we did not have the preparation it takes a lot of effort to get them to work. It is not simply putting the lab there, there is the workﬂow, getting the samples, getting them is the workflow, getting the samples, getting them collected, getting the IT working, getting the results back in appropriate time. Anybody could have seen that that would be a difficult thing to do. The proper decision should have been, yes, to get the mega labs in place, but to encourage as many other places, such as the Francis Crick Institute, which did respond, where you could do local testing. where you could do [oral testing. That where you could do local testing. That was critical particularly in That was critical particularty in the That was critical particularly in the health care worker sector. How the health rare worker sector. How much the health care worker sector. How much difference do you think will this 100,000 target make? 100,000 is a number with a lot of notes in it. It was a PR stunt that has gone a bit wrong. 100,000, why It was a PR stunt that has gone a bit wrong. 100,000, why100,000? where is bit wrong. 100,000, why100,000? Where is the strategy in that? It where is the strategy in that? It just sounded Where is the strategy in that? It just sounded good. Yesterday it was 50,000, but we should not get hung “P 50,000, but we should not get hung up on that. The real reality is this. If we had had local testing, connected to local hospitals, we connected to [oral hospitals, we could connected to local hospitals, we could have made hospitals a safe place. what could have made hospitals a safe place. What we had is the potential place. what we had is the potential for having rare place. What we had is the potential for having care workers working on for having rare workers working on the wards, for having care workers working on the wards, working with six patients, who were carrying the disease and who were not being tested. We heard Matt Hancock say a couple of weeks ago that we have got the capacity, but the NHS workers are not coming forward. Do you remember that? Why were they not remember that? why were they not coming remember that? Why were they not coming forward? Because the NHS mles coming forward? Because the NHS rules would not let them. What do mles would not let them. what do you mean? rules would not let them. What do you mean? They had such restrictive mles on you mean? They had such restrictive rules on who could be tested, they mles on who could be tested, they did not rules on who could be tested, they did not make the decision to test everybody who was a front line worker. In particular they would not test anybody who had no symptoms. We know with this disease you can be know with this disease you ran be infected know with this disease you can be infected and have no symptoms. This makes absolutely no sense. We were allowing potentially for front line rare allowing potentially for front line care workers to be on the wards rare workers to be on the wards potentially care workers to be on the wards potentially infecting people because we were not testing. That may have been because they did not have testing capacity throughout the country, but you cannot say we do not need to do it because we do not have testing capacity. Even when we could provide testing capacity, we could not do it because of the NHS mles. Testing could not do it because of the NHS rules. Testing was critical, it has mles. Testing was critical, it has not been rules. Testing was critical, it has not been handled properly. Gene, I not been handled property. Gene, I want to not been handled properly. Gene, I want to come to you on this. Paul is saying basically it is a bit of a mess. I think we should have had the mega labs, but it has not been as creative or as imaginative in getting this going as quickly as possible. John’s question is if the possible. john’s question is if the government possible. John’s question is if the government and the Scottish Government does not know who has the vims in our Government does not know who has the virus in our communities, how can we virus in our communities, how ran we know when virus in our communities, how can we know when and where to lift restrictions on movement? What are restrictions on movement? what are you doing there restrictions on movement? What are you doing there in order to have a strategy on that? Our initial strategy was what was described as the containment strategy, when essentially you tested and tracked contacts and isolated those. As the virus had clearly much wider virus had dearty much wider community virus had clearly much wider community transmission we moved steadily into where we are now, which is locked out. Our current testing strategy in Scotland is to certainly test key workers, to widen that now to beyond health and social rare. We that now to beyond health and social care. We are testing over 70—year—olds in hospital. We are 70-year-olds in hospital. We are testing 70—year—olds in hospital. We are testing symptomatic patients in our residence in social care. And we are residence in social rare. And we are testing new residence in social care. And we are testing new admissions to our care testing new admissions to our rare homes to testing new admissions to our care homes to make sure that we are not bringing the virus into those care bringing the virus into those rare homes. bringing the virus into those care homes. But I think we need to be a bit rareful homes. But I think we need to be a bit careful here that at the very outset of our experience of this pandemic the evidence then, the scientific and medical, clinical evidence, and advise then, said that asymptomatic people were probably asymptomatic peopla were probably not asymptomatic people were probably not infectious. In fact, in some instances the evidence said... That is simply not correct. Paul is taking issue with that. I am taking issue with it... Hang on one second. This is your specialist area. We have known for a significant period of time, and it has been known across the world, that those who are infected do not always have symptoms. The policies should have been... She was saying that asymptomatic people may not be infectious. Yes, but what I am saying is people without symptoms saying is peopla without symptoms are saying is people without symptoms are infected and therefore potentially it will be transferring the disease. That is a really significant issue. significant issue. Yes it is a significant issue. What I was saying significant issue. what I was saying was two significant issue. What I was saying was two points. First of all, the evidence we were looking at and the UK Government was looking at was that peopla UK Government was looking at was that people without symptoms were that peopla without symptoms were unlikely to that people without symptoms were unlikely to be infectious, but more importantly that the test itself really it was only at its most effective if you were symptomatic. As I said earlier, this virus is 130 As I said eartier, this virus is 130 days or so old As I said earlier, this virus is 130 days or so old here now in the UK, in Scotland, and the rest of the UK and undoubtedly we are learning as we progress. The key is that our strategies and our response needs to be ﬂeet strategies and our response needs to be fleet of foot. We have increased be ﬂeet of foot. We have increased our testing be fleet of foot. We have increased our testing capacity in our NHS labs here in Scotland, all our boards by the end of next week will have their individual capacity to gather those tests so that in a country like Scotland with remote and rural areas Scotland with remote and mral areas it is Scotland with remote and rural areas it is particularly important, and we it is particularty important, and we will set it is particularly important, and we will set out next week our strategy for test, trace and isolate, which regardless of what we do in terms of easing the current lockdown measures, will be a central part of our response. But I also think we need to be careful that at the moment my understanding is that the reproduction rate is considered to be under one stop that is significantly different from the start where it was round about three. It is under one, we are not confident yet about how far under it is, then there is room for manoeuvre in terms of what measures might we ease at any one point. Yes. The question is not necessarily about what measures we might ease. In fairness to what measures we might ease. In fairness toJohn, he is not trying fairness to john, he is not trying to look fairness toJohn, he is not trying to look backwards, he is trying to look forward. How do we find out who has got the virus and if we don’t find out, how can the government find out, how ran the government know find out, how can the government know when and where to lift the restrictions? This is an area where we need to see transparency and we have been trying to be constructive around this in having those discussions with government and saying we need to be open around these questions. People will remember there was a debate a few weeks ago about how we were going to have antibody testing, that testing looking to see if people had already looking to see if peopla had already had the looking to see if people had already had the virus and that was going to be widely available and now it appears that those tests were not as accurate as we initially thought, we would not have the large numbers that we initially thought we would have. It is going to be necessary for us to have a pick—up in lots of for us to have a pick-up in lots of different for us to have a pick—up in lots of different kinds of activity and been really need to see a plan around this and we have to have confidence in this. That relates to the previous question. We need to make sure that there is buy into this process right across the process, trade unions, individuals, otherwise it will not work when we come out of these different forms of lockdown because you will have debates about different kinds of workplaces and whether one is safe and one is not. We need to have a clear process. I We need to have a dear process. I want to We need to have a clear process. I want to work with the Chancellor on that. We have to do that openly, because people will raise questions about it and it will not work to the extent it could. Grant, we have had some tweets. Dan Bradshaw, a paramedic, said the government are failing to provide PPE an adequate testing to front line health care workers. I am a front line health rare workers. I am a front line health care worker and was tested five rare worker and was tested five weeks ago care worker and was tested five weeks ago and still no results. When weeks ago and still no results. when is the weeks ago and still no results. When is the government going to get a grip? Another one, Lindsay Thomas, a GP, what is the rationale behind the criteria for testing? This comes back to strategy, not a target, a strategy. As a GP I cannot test patients with symptoms, so it is guesswork. Surely it makes sense for us to test patients feeling poorly us to test patients feeling poorty enough? us to test patients feeling poorly enough? What is your response? Right enough? what is your response? Right now our testing enough? What is your response? Right now our testing capacity today of 90,000, and when we look 90,000, and when we look back tomorrow on where we end on, we did 81,500 test yesterday... This is a question about strategy rather than targets. I am trying to answer both questions at the same time. It is quite possible tomorrow that we will quite possibla tomorrow that we will see quite possible tomorrow that we will see we did reach the 100,000 target. whether see we did reach the 100,000 target. Whether or not we did, it does not whether or not we did, it does not matter, the Whether or not we did, it does not matter, the point is to have available tests. To the tweets and the questioner, the good thing is that now you can go on the that now you ran go on the government that now you can go on the government website if you are a worker in hospital, a nurse, doctor, if you are a rare worker in hospital, a nurse, doctor, if you are a care home location, if you are a rare home location, either as a if you are a care home location, either as a resident or as somebody, a rare either as a resident or as somebody, a care worker... It is not much good a rare worker... It is not much good if you have to wait a care worker... It is not much good if you have to wait five weeks. I don’t know about that case, but you don’t know about that use, but you ran go online don’t know about that case, but you can go online now and you can book a ran go online now and you ran book a place and you ran can go online now and you can book a place and you can do that either by place and you ran do that either by going to a test place and you can do that either by going to a test centre, not so good if you are in a place of work, or by ifyou are in a place ofwork, or by getting a home if you are in a place of work, or by getting a home test. I’ll give you an example of the speed at which this has been scaled up, at the beginning of the week there were only 5000 home tests available and now there are 20,000 available and that is why we would like to meet the 100,000 target. The point is peopla the 100,000 target. The point is people should be able to go online, peopla should be able to go online, order it people should be able to go online, order it themselves and get it done. What about knowing where and when what about knowing where and when and who What about knowing where and when and who has coronavirus, that is and who has coronavims, that is about and who has coronavirus, that is about contact rating, which you stopped early on? We expanded it to stopped earty on? We expanded it to symptomatic stopped early on? We expanded it to symptomatic and asymptomatic care symptomatic and asymptomatic rare workers, for symptomatic and asymptomatic care workers, for example. People can workers, for example. People ran take this workers, for example. People can take this test if they are concerned at this stage. To the track and trace thing, we started off with a low capacity, but I take Paul’s point, he is the expert in this. He said you were too slow. We started off with 2000 tests at the beginning of this crisis, it is now getting to 100,000 or above and there is another super lab opening in Cambridge on Monday. We had to create the testing capacity for the most part, although I accept there maybe some things others could have done, you are the expert. But it is a huge effort to build this up. We couldn’t maintain that process. Of the tests that we had, when the tests that we had, when this got large enough that it was in society, we focus the available testing, rightly on scientific advice in the hospitals, which required front—line hospitals, which required front-line testing. In the hospitals, which required front—line testing. In the ideal world, if we were to do this again, we would have a 100,000 test capacity and more from the outset. 0n contact tracing, from the outset. On contact tracing, we are looking for the app to be available in the middle of May. This is just to remind available in the middle of May. This isjust to remind people it is an is just to remind peopla it is an evil isjust to remind people it is an evil download on your phone and it will see if we have blue contact between us. All anonymously done. —— between us. All anonymously done. -- Bluetooth. between us. All anonymously done. —— Bluetooth. If I am positive, it will give you the heads up to go and get tested. 50 that will be an important tested. So that will be an important part in taking us tested. 50 that will be an important part in taking us forward. I will come back to this, but does that strategy sank clear to you? Testing strategy sank dear to you? Testing is critical strategy sank clear to you? Testing is critical to easing the lockdown and using technology, as they have done in South Korea and these other Asian countries, even with the intmsion Asian countries, even with the intrusion on our privacy that is intmsion on our privacy that is going to intrusion on our privacy that is going to bring, is going to be critical to get the economy back on its feet. What everyone has alluded its feet. what everyone has alluded to here, is its feet. What everyone has alluded to here, is the difficulties in getting the testing programme off the ground, the enormous bureaucracy that was encountered, the failure to involve people outside Public Health involve peopla outside Public Health England and involve people outside Public Health England and laboratories like Paul’s. I actually think Matt Hancock did the Paul’s. I actually think Matt Hancock did thejob Paul’s. I actually think Matt Hancock did the job that sometimes the Secretary of State needs to, here is a bloody great target and go and hit it. I think he has a great chance, amazingly, of hitting it. Let’s not repeat all this if we get a vaccine. We should be planning now, I have no idea, I am a vaccine. We should be planning now, I have no idea, lam not a vaccine. We should be planning now, I have no idea, I am not a now, I have no idea, lam nota scientist now, I have no idea, I am not a scientist and I don’t know if a vaccine will be developed into months or two years, but when it comes, if a government cannot vaccinate everyone in the population who wants that vaccine, pretty quickly, then I think they will be quickly, than I think they will be in real quickly, then I think they will be in real trouble. I think they should in real trouhla. I think they should be learning in real trouble. I think they should be learning from this experience, not just be learning from this experience, notjust politicians, but the people not just politicians, but the peopla who mn notjust politicians, but the people who run the NHS, and working out who nm the NHS, and working out how, once who run the NHS, and working out how, once the vaccine is discovered, which we all hope will happen, think ahead to where you are going to be and hopefully in a few months, maybe a few years. I want another question, but Paul you want to come back quickly. Testing is critical, I work on yeast and I only learned this in the last month or so. But testing is critical. We have been in the front line over this and over the last number of weeks front line workers have been begging for testing. They haven’t even provided it. 8000 community nurses in North London had five tests a day. This is no way to mn London had five tests a day. This is no way to nm a London had five tests a day. This is no way to run a ship. Then we have no way to nm a ship. Then we have this no way to mn a ship. Then we have this question of no way to run a ship. Then we have this question of capability of testing. Capacity. Capacity. You are the transport Minister, let’s take a train metaphor. We are travelling from London to Paris, 0K? The Channel Tunnel and may have capacity for ten trains an hour but if you only get three trains an hour to the tunnel and three trains out, you will have only testing at three. The real problem we are having is the workﬂow of getting actually the samplas workflow of getting actually the samples out, getting the IT sorted, actually putting the whole process, actually putting the whola process, focus actually putting the whole process, focus on the mega labs without dealing with the workﬂow. That was obvious to us weeks and weeks ago. We have been telling people about it for weeks and weeks. It has been pitifuuy slow for weeks and weeks. It has been pitifully slow to accept that that pitifuuy slow to accept that that is a big pitifully slow to accept that that is a big issue. A big mega lab will have difficulties, they need to sort it. It is easier for the smaller labs, of course it is easier and that should have been recognised at the beginning. Lessons could have been learnt from us, you could have used us as research tools to help drive the mega labs. It need a great imagination, greater leadership really about the political and also frankly, the scientific and medical level. When we come to look at it we lavel. when we come to look at it we will see level. when we come to look at it we will see we level. When we come to look at it we will see we have had many lessons we will see we have had many lassons we should will see we have had many lessons we should have learned. I will see we have had many lessons we should have learned. Ijust want to take one more question, if I can. We take one more question, if I ran. We have spent a long take one more question, if I can. We have spent a long time talking about this and not gotten as many questions as I would like. Good evening. My name is questions as I would like. Good evening. My name isJulie Benson evening. My name is julie Benson from evening. My name isJulie Benson from Leeds. I evening. My name isJulie Benson from Leeds. Iwould evening. My name isJulie Benson from Leeds. I would like to ask the panel, in Australia when people were ﬂying back in panel, in Australia when people were flying back in before they close the ﬂying back in before they close the borders, flying back in before they close the borders, people were made to isolate into a hotel for two weeks and were not allowed to go home until they were tested and cleared. I would like to understand why we are not taking those kinds of measures in this country, why we are allowing peopla to ﬂy this country, why we are allowing people to fly in and not isolating peopla to ﬂy in and not isolating them people to fly in and not isolating them the same in a hotel. Thank you. Week after week, this question has come up, which is why I wanted to take it tonight. Jeane, this is take it tonight. jeane, this is happening take it tonight. Jeane, this is happening in Scotland as well as the rest of the UK, is going to change or are we going to let people in or are we going to let peopla in willy-nilly? or are we going to let people in willy—nilly? We cannot make that willy-nilly? We cannot make that decision willy—nilly? We cannot make that decision in Scotland, because the decision about ports, whether they are airports, is made by the government. What would you like to government. what would you like to happen? The government. What would you like to happen? The question she just asked is absolutely right. We will be wanting the UK Government to give very serious consideration to stopping the inward transmission of the virus. Particularly given the the vims. Particularty given the fact the virus. Particularly given the fact that the people across Scotland fact that the peopla across Scotland and fact that the people across Scotland andindeed fact that the people across Scotland and indeed across the UK have worked so hard to successfully and indeed across the UK have worked so he rd to successfully suppress and indeed across the UK have worked so hard to successfully suppress it so hard to successfuuy suppress it to this point. so hard to successfully suppress it to this point. It seems to me foolhardy to then not give serious consideration to what we do about international travel both into and out of the UK. Is this something you have been pushing for, as the Scottish Government? It is something we have raised and then continuing discussions of we have collectively discussions of we have collactively looked discussions of we have collectively looked across the four nations to look at what measures we might make to ease the lockdown and that is one of the areas we will pursue with the UK Government and the Prime Minister in the discussions that we have. People have been asking this time and time again and cannot understand, and I can’t either, when so many other countries put people so many other countries put peopla into so many other countries put people into quarantine if they come into the country? I think there have been serious concerns around this. What serious concerns around this. what we have serious concerns around this. What we have been saying to government, it needs to be open around its reasoning on this question. It is not that he wanted to change, but you want to understand the reason? We need to understand why that decision has been taken because practice in other countries has been different. If we look at other people coming into the country, I peopla coming into the country, I have people coming into the country, I have dealt with huge numbers of Brits around the world who would desperately love to be back here and are being brought back at a much slower rate. Maybe Grant can slower rate. Maybe Grant ran enlighten us slower rate. Maybe Grant can enlighten us a little bit more. I accept on the one hand, some of the measures that were put in place in other nations haven’t necessarily worked. For example, temperature measurement as people come in, because that is not robust, obviously. We do need to look at the fact that potentially there have been people coming into the country who might have been taking the virus with them. But this is conjoined with the testing issue. I am sorry to bring it back to that and I know we have been talking about it, but people who have come back into the peopla who have come back into the country had people who have come back into the country had then been able to quickly access a test for themselves to know what their situation was, then we could have dealt with this more robustly. I think this is more of an issue because we don’t yet have that community testing in the UK to the extent that applies in many other country. Henry has tweeted, we are all on the up down so ban peopla tweeted, we are all on the up down so ban people coming into this so ban peopla coming into this country so ban people coming into this country would have been tested and they should spend 1A days in they should spend 14 days in quarantine. they should spend 1A days in quarantine. Australia and New Zealand were introducing this policy when we were going to the Cheltenham races. Is this going to change, grand? Different countries are in different moments of this pandemic at different times. But whilst it is endemic in this country, in other words prevalent across the population, it makes no great difference to the overall figures, according to the scientists and medical experts. However, that changes as we get a grip of those numbers and then becomes something which is very valuable to do. Isn’t which is very valuabla to do. Isn’t that the which is very valuable to do. Isn’t that the case now, we are below one? that the use now, we are below one? Starting to use that the case now, we are below one? Starting to use the classic flattening of the curve, it is ﬂattening of the curve, it is starting to flattening of the curve, it is starting to come down but there is the important point of returning British nationals, but it is absolutely true to say, if the absolutely tme to say, if the British absolutely true to say, if the British people themselves are being asked to continue with social distancing measures, it is quite right to expect people coming into the country would have the same measures apply to them. So it is actually something very much as we get to the smaller numbers and not wanting to see a repeat of the infection, something very much as a line of discussion. Paul? It is obvious, we should be doing it and I hope with the capacity for testing we would have in place and with the recognition of the importance of this, in the coming months we will introduce this because this is not going to go away in a hurry. He would require people coming into the country to download the NHS app for the track and tracing purposes as well. I entirely agree with the question. The lesson of all of this question. The lasson of all of this is treat question. The lesson of all of this is treat the public like adults and explain to them exactly why you are doing these things. Otherwise people sit at home and they go, hold on there is a walker in Derbyshire and they have a drone following them and barking at them to go back home when you have thousands of people going you have thousands of peopla going through you have thousands of people going through Heathrow Airport. Grant says, the scientists tell us at the moment it is not statistically significant, then the Walker on his significant, than the Walker on his own is significant, then the Walker on his own is not statistically significant either. People are very afraid, understandably for themselves and their loved ones and they will take the word of the government and the Prime Minister stands there, as he did today, he is very optimistic and impressive when he does that but I think we are coming to the end of taking the ministerial information. People are getting their information from all over the world. I think we are moving into a phase where it is in the government’s interest to open this up, explain all their thinking and carry people with them, trying and carry peopla with them, trying tarry and carry peopla with them, trying carry the and carry people with them, trying carry the opposition with them, try and carry the media with them, but above all try and carry the public. I always found if you treated the pub“: I always found if you treated the public like adults, they responded like adults. I think George is so right. I am like adults. I think George is so right. lam not like adults. I think George is so right. I am not sure we have been treating the public, society as grown-ups. treating the public, society as grown—ups. We have had the slightly grown-ups. We have had the slightly weaselly grown—ups. We have had the slightly weaselly explanations as to what we should be doing and capacity and these sorts of things. We are in a crisis, we know it is difficult, we need, for leadership, you need to be seen to take on the problems and explain them. I think that is the “Y explain them. I think that is the way through it. I add to that, we have to act better as a community, we have to work together to get this through. We need proper leadership, proper transparency, through. We need proper leadership, propertransparency, proper communication so we can get to that communication so we ran get to that as a better communication so we can get to that as a better community. We are out of time, I as a better community. We are out of time, lam as a better community. We are out of time, I am afraid. Tonight, as a better community. We are out of time, lam afraid. Tonight, our recorder questions came from Leeds in this virtual New World we are living in. Next week we want questions coming from people living questions coming from peopla living in or questions coming from people living in or around Newcastle and the week after that from Oxford. You cannot come to the studio, not yet anyway. I cannot wait until that can happen I rannot wait until that ran happen again, but we I cannot wait until that can happen again, but we do want to hear from you because you make Question Time what it is. Next week, if you live in Newcastle, go to the Question Time website and apply in the usual way. Let us know what you want to 55V way. Let us know what you want to say and then you will record your question and we can help you with question and we ran help you with that. question and we can help you with that. Send it in, just like the ones you saw this evening. If you want to join the discussion on what we have been talking about, you can and join been talking about, you ran and join Adrian been talking about, you can and join Adrian Charles and guests and Question Time extra time on five live now. -- Question Time extra time on five live now. —— Adrian Childs. Thank live now. -- Adrian Childs. Thank you for your live now. —— Adrian Childs. Thank you for your question is, thank you jeane from you for your question is, thank you Jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to everyone he Jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to everyone he recorded a question or who got in touch on social media and thank you at home for watching. From Question Time, goodbye.