Tonight, we are in Middlesbrough. Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi, the government Business and Industry Minister, formerly children and families minister under Theresa May. labour families minister under Theresa May. Labour Shadow Health Secretary since labour Shadow Health Secretary since 2016, Labour Shadow Health Secretary since 2016, former adviser to Gordon Brown and Ed Miliband, Jon Ashworth. and Ed Miliband, jon Ashworth. Alison and Ed Miliband, Jon Ashworth. Alison Phillips, 3 and Ed Miliband, Jon Ashworth. Alison Phillips, a journalist from student newspapers and national titles like the Sunday people, now titles like the Sunday peopla, now editor titles like the Sunday people, new editor of the Daily Mirror. Ayesha Vardag, celebrity divorce lawyer known for making prenup agreements an accepted part of the law in England, described by Time magazine is the diva of divorce. And is the dive of divorce. And co—founder of the big issue co-founder of the big issue magazine, co—founder of the big issue magazine, John Bird. Welcome to our panel, to the audience here and to you at home. You ran audience here and to you at home. You ranjoin in the audience here and to you at home. You canjoin in the conversation on You ranjoin in the conversation on social You canjoin in the conversation on social media at BBC Question Time. Let’s take the first question from Dawn Galloway. Given to the current strains on the NHS, is the government for a coronavirus government for a coronavims pandemic? government for a coronavirus pandemic? Figures are going up and up. jon pandemic? Figures are going up and up. Jon Ashworth? Well, it’s an excellent question, and that is what we are all asking ourselves, aren’t we? Coronavirus now has turned from we? Coronavims now has turned from a serious we? Coronavirus now has turned from a serious service issue for China to potentially massive trauma for the world. It’s going to have huge impact on the global economy and probably slow global growth and trade but, most significantly, it looks like we are now heading for a health crisis, a pandemic, and the World Health Organisation have warned countries to prepare for a pandemic. Now, our warned countries to prepare for a pandemic. Now, ourthoughts pandemic. Now, our thoughts obviously pandemic. Now, ourthoughts obviously have to be with the patients who have got the virus at the moment here, and all the NHS staff and Public Health England staff, who are working exceptionally hard. As it happens, funnily enough, despite what I normally come on these shows and say, I don’t have any criticism so far of the government and NHS England’s handling of this crisis. I have been broadly supportive of the government’s approach. But the key thing is this. We know, after ten years of cutbacks and austerity, ten years of cutting over 15,000 beds in the NHS, ten years of failing to the NHS, ten years offailing to recmit the NHS, ten years of failing to recruit the staff we need, we are recmit the staff we need, we are short of recruit the staff we need, we are short of 40,000 nurses, for example, and we know our NHS is under considerable strain let me give you considerabla strain let me give you a quick fact, considerable strain let me give you a quick fact, the numbers waiting on a trolley in a corridor in a hospital because they can’t get a bed, in the last year of the Labour bed, in the last year of the labour government, bed, in the last year of the Labour government, that was around 61,000. In the last year of this Conservative government, it wasn’t 61,000, it was 850,000. That’s the stale 61,000, it was 850,000. That’s the scale of the deterioration in the NHS under the Tories. Last week, 80% NHS under the Tories. Last week, 8096 of critical NHS under the Tories. Last week, 80% of critical care beds were occupied. of critical rare beds were occupied. It meant of critical care beds were occupied. It meant that last week there was around 700 critical care beds free, around 700 critical rare beds free, about around 700 critical care beds free, about three or four per hospital, so there are now serious questions for the government that if, and it is still a big if, if this coronavirus hits us and it becomes a pandemic, randy NHS hits us and it becomes a pandemic, candy NHS cope if they don’t put randy NHS cope if they don’t put some candy NHS cope if they don’t put some extra emergency funding because, at the moment, the NHS is under huge strain and pressure after years of Tory cutbacks. APPLAUSE So, Nadhim Zahawi, and we were hearing the Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, saying that the NHS is prepared and in excellent shape to deal with it. During some of what jon has said, deal with it. During some of what Jon has said, and what NHS staff jon has said, and what NHS staff have Jon has said, and what NHS staff have been saying about how tough things are, should we get into a position where the coronavirus situation becomes worse, and we don’t know if it will, will be NHS cope? We have now been preparing for a number of weeks. We have a Cobra meeting every week and I am the lead minister meeting every week and I am the lead ministerfor the meeting every week and I am the lead minister for the department of business because of the critical infrastructure for the UK and businesses like the automotive sector and retail, but the question was about the NHS. We have tested 7000 people to date. The NHS has been coping incredibly well, and I pay tribute to the nurses and doctors and all the staff that have made this possible, so the NHS has been coping well. But the question is, if it should get worse, where will the staff and the beds come from? The reason we have been having a Cobra meeting every week, and the Secretary of State for Health as a Cabinet update every week, and updates the Prime Minister every day, and for example, in my department, I have stood up a team of doing this in every sector every day, that’s because we have to make preparations for the worst case preparations for the worst rase scenario, it preparations for the worst case scenario, it has to be plentiful scenario, it has to be plantiful carefully. Have we got enough beds? Well, jon is wrong, Have we got enough beds? Well, Jon is wrong, because we got 100,000 acute beds, and he should know that as shadow minister. Started well by saying he was back in the minister on this issue. Of course, the NHS be under more pressure, but the reason we have made these preparations, working across the whole of government, every department, we are at Cobra every week to do this, that’s because we have been making these preparations, because you have to prepare for the best worst case to prepare for the best worst rase scenario to prepare for the best worst case scenario so we are ready. We have a phenomenal team of people in public of England who are doing this work. We have to prepare for the best worst case scenario, we will be worst rase scenario, we will be ready for it. I’m worst case scenario, we will be ready for it. I’m not wrong on bed numbers. We have lost about 17,000 beds since 2010, and the key thing is the critical care beds. They were is the critical rare beds. They were at 801: is the critical care beds. They were at 80% occupancy last week, which at 8096 occupancy last week, which meant at 80% occupancy last week, which meant there were about 700 available. We also have a more serious level of beds, and we only have about 15 of those, Ecmo. On the acute measure you used, your have about 15 of those, Ecmo. On the acute measure you used, yourfigures acute measure you used, your figures are broadly acute measure you used, yourfigures are broadly correct, but most hospitals are running at about 95% hospitals are mnning at about 9596 occupancy on hospitals are running at about 95% occupancy on those beds. You should also recognise, in the last five days, what we did was make it the law of the land that the additional 34 law of the land that the additional 3A billion a year of funding will be 34 billion a year offunding will be there for 3A billion a year of funding will be there for the NHS. That’s not enough. You spent ten years running enough. You spent ten years mnning down the enough. You spent ten years running down the NHS! APPLAUSE Can I ask you one thing? APPLAUSE (“an I ask you one thing? This is not in any sense to try Can I ask you one thing? This is not in any sense to try and overstate the issue, because we are not in a pandemic at this stage, but should it become more serious in this country, are the military on standby? Every department is at Cobra every week. Cobra every week. So the military as well? Every department is working together and we are making preparations for best worst case preparations for best worst rase scenario, preparations for best worst case scenario, because that’s the responsible thing to do. If people responsible thing to do. If peopla have responsible thing to do. If people have been diagnosed with coronavirus, would they be put into coronavims, would they be put into a normal coronavirus, would they be put into a normal hospital or would they buy isolated in a specialist unit? jessira isolated in a specialist unit? Jessica would they be isolated. I’m jessira would they be isolated. I’m going to have a Jessica would they be isolated. I’m going to have a go around the audience for other questions,. The man behind you. I think we are still thinking in terms of national or [oral issue, thinking in terms of national or local issue, when it’s really a global thing. local issue, when it’s really a globalthing. I believe local issue, when it’s really a global thing. I believe that we should forget politics for the moment and consider it as a global thing and deal with the countries and try to tackle this pressure, rather than just looking at it in [oral rather than just looking at it in local terms. APPLAUSE Yes, with the glasses at the back. If the NHS is struggling so much, If the NHS is stmggling so much, should If the NHS is struggling so much, should we not reduce the struggle by stopping trouble? I’ll take one stopping troubla? I’ll take one more. stopping trouble? I’ll take one more. Where will the staff come from more. where will the staff come from to cover more. Where will the staff come from to cover the extra workload that this pandemic might cause? That’s a lot of questions for you. I will go round the panel first. I think we are now at a point where this is becoming a really serious concern to many people. Particularly to the many peopla. Particularty to the elderty or many people. Particularly to the elderly or people with existing health conditions or people with health conditions or peopla with very young health conditions or people with very young children. Although I think preparedness has seemed good so far, there are still stories we have heard at the Mirror from GP is still uncertain about information to give out, but generally the containment seems to be going well. But we know that there is no slack in our NHS now. We have had ten years where the funding has not been there. We know that something like 25% of people who go into A&E at the 2596 of peopla who go into AaE at the moment 25% of people who go into A&E at the moment will be on a trolley for more than four hours. We heard the story the other day about 93—year—old RAF the other day about 93-year-old RAF hero who the other day about 93—year—old RAF hero who had to wait on a trolley for 12 hours, so how will we cope with that plus coronavirus, plus if with that plus coronavims, plus if then we with that plus coronavirus, plus if then we have NHS staff becoming ill or having to go into self isolation? This is a major, major concern, but you are quite right that perhaps this isn’t quite the time for politic but this isn’t quite the time for politics but ensuring the NHS has politic but ensuring the NHS has exactly politics but ensuring the NHS has exactly what it needs to get through this. APPLAUSE A pandemic is where something very, very big happens to the world. In 1919, more people died of influenza 1919, more peopla died of inﬂuenza than 1919, more people died of influenza than died in the First World War. 50 than died in the First World War. So we are talking than died in the First World War. 50 we are talking about than died in the First World War. So we are talking about enormous social movements. This is not we are talking about enormous social movements. This is notjust a health movements. This is not just a health crisis, it is a movements. This is notjust a health crisis, it is a social crisis. To expect the NHS, irrespective of whether it had every available bed, to respond to a crisis that could [cad to respond to a crisis that could [sad to to respond to a crisis that could lead to a rerun of 1919, we need a lot more. We need the army, we need all of the private medical facilities in this country, and there are many, many, and say to them, you are in, whether you like it or not. The nationalisation of the health service, in the truest the health service, in the tmest sense of the health service, in the truest sense of the world, for a particular time, in order to deal with this pandemic. Deal time, in order to deal with this pandemic. Dealwith time, in order to deal with this pandemic. Deal with this pandemic simply on the basis that, as our colleague says, simply on the basis of the existing services that are offered by the NHS. We have to look beyond it. What do you think should beyond it. what do you think should happen, john? beyond it. What do you think should happen, John? I mean, beyond it. What do you think should happen,John? I mean, I beyond it. What do you think should happen, John? I mean, lam one of happen, john? I mean, lam one of those people happen, John? I mean, lam one of those people who came here and said, come on, let’s not exaggerate, but let’s be honest, we don’t want to exaggerate, we don’t want to look on it as a breathless crisis. My brother won’t stay in a hotel in London now because he doesn’t want to catch coronavirus. I mean, that’s a bit silly. But we do have to nationalise all those facilities in and around health, we have to dragoon them in, and look upon it as though it is a war, a war on getting rid of this pandemic, and this is exactly what happened in 1919, and it caused the death of millions and millions of people, but the thing millions of peopla, but the thing was it millions of people, but the thing was it was turned around. It’s worth saying that the death rate for Spanish flu was way higher, exponentially higher than we are talking about. talking about. I think we have to analyse the situation quite coolly, because, of course, everyone is afraid of the deadly virus, and peopla are afraid of the deadly virus, and people are panicking and changing peopla are panicking and changing their plans, people are panicking and changing their plans, people are locking themselves in their homes. We have to remember that, as best we understand it at the moment, about 801: of understand it at the moment, about 80% of people are fine. Many of them 8096 of peopla are fine. Many of them don’t 80% of people are fine. Many of them don’t even realise they have it, which is one reason it’s so difficult to catch. That 15% of difficult to ratch. That 1596 of peopla difficult to catch. That 15% of people have moderately severe symptoms are not really at risk, and about 596 symptoms are not really at risk, and about 5% are really at risk and about 596 are really at risk and under about 5% are really at risk and under threat. about 5% are really at risk and underthreat. It’s about 5% are really at risk and under threat. It’s that 5% we really under threat. It’s that 596 we really have to worry under threat. It’s that 5% we really have to worry about and look after "TY have to worry about and look after very closely, and that’s what the NHS has to be very ready for. The question is, is the government prepared? Effectively, no one was prepared for this. There is generally, I would prepared for this. There is generally, Iwould imagine, people have contingency plans. We had Sars and Mars have contingency plans. We had Sars and Mers and swine flu, so there is and Mers and swine ﬂu, so there is a sense of and Mers and swine flu, so there is a sense of people doing something, but we all know that the NHS is underinvested and struggling, and we need to restructure it. We can’t do need to restmcture it. We can’t do that this need to restructure it. We can’t do that this week. We have to take a few emergency measures. You have to look at things like clearing out possibla look at things like clearing out possible beds. For example, sometimes hospital beds are used as an alternative to care because there an alternative to rare because there are not an alternative to rare because there are not proper an alternative to care because there are not proper care structures in are not proper rare structures in place. We need are not proper care structures in place. We need to find quick ways to get rare place. We need to find quick ways to get care structures in place so that get rare structures in place so that hospital beds get care structures in place so that hospital beds can be used for the hospital beds ran be used for the people that hospital beds can be used for the people that need them for this crisis situation. However, what I do think is that what the government has done has been quite amazing, in terms of giving people the autonomy terms of giving peopla the autonomy and ability to terms of giving people the autonomy and ability to look after themselves in quite an organised way, the whole drive through testing schemes, call drive through testing schemes, all us and drive through testing schemes, call us and we will test you at home, those things which enable people to those things which enabla peopla to look those things which enable people to look after themselves, because I think people in the UK are quite responsible about things. They look after themselves and their neighbours and families, so it’s giving them the means to do that, and that’s been a game changer impaired too, for example, Italy, which locked the borders very early which locked the borders very earty on. But they which locked the borders very early on. But they have a lot more cases. Let’s put some of these cases back Let’s put some of these rases back to Let’s put some of these cases back to Nadhim Zahawi. Where will the to Nadhim Zahawi. where will the staff to Nadhim Zahawi. Where will the staff come from? You asked about isolation units, and we have seen some at the beginning. Where will some at the beginning. where will the some at the beginning. Where will the staff come from? One strategy is to contain and delay the vims. One strategy is to contain and delay the virus. Then of course, you do the vims. Then of course, you do the the virus. Then of course, you do the research and mitigate. But where are the stuff coming from? That was the question. the question. —— where are the staff the question. -- where are the staff coming from? the question. —— where are the staff coming from? There are already more staff in the NHS, but we will work across the whole of the government. where across the whole of the government. Where are the extra staff going to where are the extra staff going to come Where are the extra staff going to come from? I don’t know about the 8000 extra nurses, I don’t know if that is fewer nurses that would have left. that is fewer nurses that would have left, or actually more nurses. But should there be an increase in the number of coronavirus cases, do you accept that there will be a need for more staff? We plan across government at Cobra every week. We know that. You can’t magic up staff overnight. And the health service is well equipped and is dealing with this crisis in a good way. What I am this crisis in a good way. what I am trying to say is, if this crisis in a good way. What I am trying to say is, if we do get to the worst—case scenario, we have the worst-case scenario, we have plans in place the worst—case scenario, we have plans in place across government to make sure we with it. make sure we with it. Could we bring in the private sector? We can do in the private sector? We ran do lots of things in the private sector? We can do lots of things that are available to us. The question was about working internationally on this. The Cobra team have already put £16 internationally on this. The Cobra team have already put £45 million to work through team have already put £16 million to work through the Dfid team to other countries who are not as well—prepared as we are. Travel well-prepared as we are. Travel advice well—prepared as we are. Travel advice has also been important. We have made sure that all our airports and ports have clear advice and are monitoring. We are working across the board to make sure we are ready if we get to the worst case scenario. In Venice to the government, they are following the advice of the Chief Medical Officer -- in advice of the Chief Medical Officer —— infairness advice of the Chief Medical Officer —— in fairness to the government. -- in fairness to the government. That is why I said —— in fairness to the government. That is why I said in my remarks that so far, I don’t have a major criticism of the approach of the government, of NHS England and Pub“: government, of NHS England and Public Health England. But as has just been exposed, if this does turn into a pandemic, the government dearty have into a pandemic, the government clearly have no idea where they will dearty have no idea where they will get the staff clearly have no idea where they will get the staff for the NHS. We are already short of 40,000 thousand nurses. We are already short of resources. 50 nurses. We are already short of resources. So far, I have been in support of the government and I pay tribute to the NHS. But if this takes a turn for the worse, as we have just heard, they have no idea where they will get the staff from to deal with this. A lot of you asked about coronavirus, but a lot asked about coronavims, but a lot of you also asked about coronavirus, but a lot of you also asked about this next question. Let’s hear of you also asked about this next question. Let’s hearfrom Vaughn question. Let’s hear from Vaughn Davies. Is question. Let’s hearfrom Vaughn Davies. Is the fall in life expectancy proof that austerity kills? 50 I think you are referring kills? So I think you are referring to a report kills? 50 I think you are referring to a report that came out kills? So I think you are referring to a report that came out today, authored by a professor marmot, who talks about the decrease in life expectancy. He said the damage to health and well—being is unprecedented over the last ten years. He also said the damage need not have happened and it is shocking. He laid the blame mostly at the door of austerity. Alison? This report is one of the most shocking thing is we have read in many years. One of the most striking points in the report was that women in some of the most poor areas in the north—east of England are likely the north-east of England are likely to die the north—east of England are likely to die sooner than they would have done ten years ago. This comes on the back of historically, we have always found life expectancy increasing. Across the board, people increasing. Across the board, peopla who earn increasing. Across the board, people who earn more are going to live longer, is the bottom line in this report. And it does come down to austerity. It’s a whole combination austerity. It’s a whola combination of things in austerity. It’s a whole combination of things in many problems now. It of things in many problams now. It is not just one of things in many problems now. It is notjust one thing, it is a selection of things. It is poor housing, job insecurity, the breakdown of communities, the breakdown of essential services. All these things have added to the sense that the people with less will that the peopla with lass will suffer that the people with less will suffer more. There is a range of other issues going on in our communities as well. There is a greater sense of isolation and mental health issues, but so many of those come back to the knock—on those come back to the knock-on effects those come back to the knock—on effects of austerity and it is ten years into this now. Yes, we we have a government that is committed to doing all sorts of things to make it better. But the scale of the problem, which was created by the Conservative government, is so great now and Conservative government, is so great new and the damage is so Conservative government, is so great now and the damage is so enormous to people’s lives that I wonder whether they have the ability to turn it around in the way they have promised people such as those in the north—east who voted for them. north-east who voted for them. Ayesha? I north—east who voted for them. Ayesha? I think it’s tricky, because Ayesha? Ithink it’s tricky, because as Ayesha? Ithink it’s tricky, because asl Ayesha? I think it’s tricky, because as I understand from that report, Mel -- as I understand from that report, Mel —— male life expectancy was Mel -- male life expectancy was going up, it Mel —— male life expectancy was going up, it was women that was going down. Women are now working a lot more and they are often working without enough support with their children and they are trying to do everything. 50 men are getting everything. So men are getting better, everything. 50 men are getting better, women are getting worse. That is something to look at. Of course we have to think about the impact of austerity, and I agree with Alison that we have to look at what has happened to communities and the fragmentation and the lack of connection between people, the loneliness and unhappiness. As far as the north—east is concerned, life as the north-east is concerned, life expectancy for as the north—east is concerned, life expectancy for men has gone down. I read that for men in some areas, it had gone up, but I accept what you are saying. But of course, austerity does have its impact and I think the impact on communities has been grave. It is not impact on communities has been grave. It is notjust austerity. It grave. It is not just austerity. It does grave. It is notjust austerity. It does combine with other elements like the general fragmentation, like people living in their own homes, peopla living in their own homes, watching TV people living in their own homes, watching TV and not connecting with peoplc, and watching TV and not connecting with people, and the sense of loneliness and destabilisation and mental health, which leads to alcoholism, dmg abuse, health, which leads to alcoholism, drug abuse, unhealthy living and dmg abuse, unhealthy living and depression. drug abuse, unhealthy living and depression. All of that combined together and we have to fight all of those things at once. Let’s hear from some of the people in the audience. In the north—east, in the audience. In the north-east, in the most deprived audience. In the north—east, in the most deprived areas, people are living five years less than the same areas in London. That is a huge health injustice. How is the government proposing to right the wrongs of the last ten years? I know in the north—east, women’s life in the north-east, women’s life expectancy in the north—east, women’s life expectancy has decreased by almost a year in more or less the last ten years. In London, it has increased by about a year. Yes? by about a year. Yes? My father was born in 1920. He died in October last year. He was 99 and three quarters. His brothers and sisters all lived to a great age. He ate to live, he didn’t live to eat. He rode a bike. It is people now you don’t a bike. It is peopla now you don’t do these things. a bike. It is people now you don’t do these things. The professor’s report blamed mostly austerity, but you think it is lifestyles, unconnected to austerity? My father was born in the 19205, which had austerity and the general strike. He fought in World War II. My grandfather fought fought in World War II. My grandfatherfought in fought in World War II. My grandfather fought in World War I. He lived till he was 87. My dad live till. 99. I He lived till he was 87. My dad live till 99. I am still here. Sounds like you have a very strong gene pool there. Yes? The lady behind me in the white was referring to a report that came out in the white was referring to a report that came outlast in the white was referring to a report that came out last year where it said that people in the north—east actually had lower than north-east actually had lower than average life north—east actually had lower than average life expectancy than in the rest of the country. And now on top of that, it is dropping. We are in Middlesbrough. I think this city scores in the top three worst areas of the country in a number of areas of social deprivation. Austerity is killing people here. And it’s about time that that was seen, particularly by the Conservative government who has been doing this for the last ten years and they take action to undo that damage. Considering the drop in life expectancy, we can’t take much more. Is this a stain on the record of the Conservative government, Nadhim? If we are to have a sustainable debate about this, it’s worth looking at the evidence us sensibly. Do you think these comments have not been sensible? No, on the country. We have to do much more. But in 2010, the Professor’s review then found that poorer people in poorer places would die seven years earlier than would die seven years eartier than those living in would die seven years earlier than those living in the richest places. He described inequality in health as unfair. He said there were huge discrepancies in life expectancy between rich and poor. But what is new today is that life expectancy overall, which has been increasing for hundreds of years, now is showing a decrease and he is blaming austerity from the last ten years while we had a Conservative government. Let’s look at the whole evidence. evidence. He said it didn’t happen by chance. I did a bit of research on this, knowing it would probably come up tonight. And I am not mnning away come up tonight. And I am not running away from it. Part of the mnning away from it. Part of the reason why we running away from it. Part of the reason why we have made it the law of the land that we put £35 billion of the land that we put 55 billion more of the land that we put £35 billion more into the NHS is because we have to deal with some of these inequalities. 1A billion more into education. The least well off local authorities, we have education. The least well off local authorities, we havejust announced authorities, we have just announced a massive authorities, we havejust announced a massive boost for local government, 2.9 billion of additional spending. The least well off will get 15% more than the more off will get 1596 more than the more well off off will get 15% more than the more well off local authorities. So yes, well off [oral authorities. So yes, there is a well off local authorities. So yes, there is a challenge. People in Middlesbrough deserved for us to be better Middlesbrough deserved for us to be betterfor Middlesbrough deserved for us to be better for them. Middlesbrough deserved for us to be betterfor them. Many Middlesbrough deserved for us to be better for them. Many people trusted better for them. Many people tmsted us with better for them. Many people trusted us with their vote across the UK and we have to do better. Was the austerity policy mistake, then? No. We had to balance the books. Then why are you spending the money now? Because there is nothing decent about crashing the economy. When Venezuela was floating on a lake of Venezuela was ﬂoating on a lake of oil, no Venezuela was floating on a lake of oil, no Venezuelan should be poor. Please don’t make a comparison between Great Britain and Venezuela. That is absolutely ridiculous. That is absolutely ridiculous. Let’s get the history lesson right. It get the history lasson right. It wasn’t get the history lesson right. It wasn’t the Conservatives who did this, it was the coalition government. It was. Our make Nick Gees government. It was. Our make Nick Clegg getting in bed with Cameron. And what they did was, they didn’t realise that the cost of austerity is too much. Austerity is so expensive because not only does it destroy the lives of people in a community, it affects their minds. It affects their well—being. The It affects their well-being. The lack of It affects their well—being. The lack of libraries, the lack of schooling, closing down of our high streets. All of these things happened, and as a person who has worked in this area for more than the last ten years, on and off over the last 30 years, I can tell you the last 30 years, I ran tell you that the the last 30 years, I can tell you that the cost of austerity has destroyed the community and made people feel as though there is no peopla feel as though there is no future. future. If you can’t feel you have got a future, then it doesn’t matter what a Conservative minister says. The woman in the black headscarf? Hello, I The woman in the black headscarf? Hello, Ijust wanted to also ask, in your opinion, how much does the Hello, Ijust wanted to also ask, in your opinion, how much does thejob your opinion, how much does the job market at your opinion, how much does thejob market at present influence that statistic? Which statistic? Life expectancy going down. To what extent does the gig economy, zero hours, the lack of stability, to what extent does that affect it as well? In my opinion, it is not what extent does that affect it as well? In my opinion, it is notjust well? In my opinion, it is not just the NHS well? In my opinion, it is notjust the NHS and public services, it is also the lack of family security, the knowing how much you are going to earn in any given month, being unabla to to earn in any given month, being unable to call in sick because you unabla to all in sick because you are unable to call in sick because you are technically self—employed. That are technically self-employed. That is affecting are technically self—employed. That is affecting people as well. The job market today is markedly different to what it was ten years ago and that is affecting people’s health and mental health as well. Why has the Prime Minister gone exceptionally quiet about issues in the north—east? I believe that some the north-east? I believe that some of these key the north—east? I believe that some of these key issues we are discussing today, he has his vote on the north—east, but he hasn’t really the north-east, but he hasn’t really lived up to the north—east, but he hasn’t really lived up to honouring his promise to us. The man in the checked shirt. Surely austerity has had something to do with this because, if there are cuts to children and adults’ mental health services, and male suicide is one of the biggest killers for men. Clearly that has killers for men. Cleariy that has dragged killers for men. Clearly that has dragged down the figure. Jon? That dragged down the figure. jon? That final point is dragged down the figure. Jon? That final point is so important. One thing this report found is that what the academics called the mortality the academic rallad the mortality rate, peopla the academics called the mortality rate, people dying, is increasing rate, peopla dying, is increasing for peopla in rate, people dying, is increasing for people in their 405, particularly for suicide, for people in their 405, particularly forsuicide, drug for people in their 405, particularly for suicide, drug abuse particularty for suicide, dmg abuse and particularly for suicide, drug abuse and alcohol abuse. To answer the original question, the simple answer to your question is, yes, this report is a devastating verdict on ten years of Tory austerity. And what this report says... Coalition. There were a lot of toys in there! What There were a lot of toys in there! what this There were a lot of toys in there! What this report says is that life what this report says is that life expectancy, What this report says is that life expectancy, which has generally improved year by year for 100 years, has ground to a halt virtually. You are right to say that ten years ago he did a report highlighting health inequalities, but in the last ten years life expectancy has virtually ground to a halt and has actually mn ground to a halt and has actually run backwards the very poorest mn backwards the very poorest women. run backwards the very poorest women. One part of the country where it is going backwards, where it is most prevalent, is here in the north—east. That is what is going on north-east. That is what is going on after ten years north—east. That is what is going on after ten years of austerity, and it’s not just after ten years of austerity, and it’s notjust about NHS funding, it’s not just about NHS funding, it’s it’s notjust about NHS funding, it’s about the fact that you have cut liens from children’s and young people’sservices, the steepest cuts in the north—east. You have close in the north-east. You have close sure start in the north—east. You have close sure start centres. It’s about the fact you have cut benefits so we have charities reporting of children scavenging in bins at school, and child poverty has gone up to 4 million. You know what? It’s going to get worse because more cuts are coming that will push child poverty “P coming that will push child poverty up to a higher level than it was under john up to a higher level than it was underJohn Major, Margaret Thatcher, under john Major, Margaret Thatcher, the highest underJohn Major, Margaret Thatcher, the highest level since records began since 1961, condemning future generations to getting ill quicker in life and dying sooner. That is Tory austerity, and I’m afraid you should be ashamed. Jon, given all should be ashamed. jon, given all that, why do should be ashamed. Jon, given all that, why do you think you persuaded peopla, not in that, why do you think you persuaded people, not in Middlesbrough, but peopla, not in Middlasbrough, but around people, not in Middlesbrough, but around the area to vote? at that elaction around the area to vote? at that election was devastating for the elaction was devastating for the labour election was devastating for the Labour Party. We got hammered, and labour Party. We got hammered, and there were Labour Party. We got hammered, and there were seats like north—west there were seats like north-west Durham, there were seats like north—west Durham, Bishop Auckland, Blyth Valley, which were Labour Best heart Valley, which were labour Best heart and soil -- Valley, which were Labour Best heart and soil —— Labour’s heart and soul. and soil -- Labour’s heart and soul. You are more likely and soil —— Labour’s heart and soul. You are more likely to see sugar appear now than Boris You are more likely to see sugar appear now than Borisjohnson. Many appear now than Boris johnson. Many of the appear now than Borisjohnson. Many of the constituencies appear now than BorisJohnson. Many of the constituencies that went from labour to Tory of the constituencies that went from Labour to Tory are the constituencies where these health inequalities are getting wider and wider. I used to come on your programme and speak with great eloquence, I hope, about the state of things, but we didn’t convince peopla. of things, but we didn’t convince people. We are having a leadership election, as you know, and hopefully with a new leader in place we will be able to get out there and can be able to get out there and ran claim be able to get out there and ran daim again be able to get out there and can claim again and rebuild. We have a big challenge on our hands and I have to accept that, and we have to understand why we felt people so badly, because we did in this part of the world, and we cannot allow that of the world, and we rannot allow that again, of the world, and we cannot allow that again, because I want a Labour that again, because I want a labour government to that again, because I want a Labour government to deal with child poverty. government to deal with child poverty, the state of the NHS, and my party cannot continue failing to do my party rannot continue failing to do that. my party cannot continue failing to do that. Is an example of a Labour do that. Is an example of a labour government in do that. Is an example of a Labour government in Wales, and life expectancy has increased much more quickly in England than in Wales. quickly in England than in Walas. Mortality quickly in England than in Wales. Mortality rates amongst women in labour Mortality rates amongst women in Labour run Wales have risen, despite labour mn Wales have risen, despite falling in both Labour run Wales have risen, despite falling in both England and Scotland. This is not a party political point. Scotland is doing well on mortality rates whereas, in labour mn well on mortality rates whereas, in Labour run Wales, mortality amongst labour mn Walas, mortality amongst women Labour run Wales, mortality amongst women has risen under Labour in women has risen under labour in Walas. women has risen under Labour in Wales. Your women has risen under Labour in Wales. Yourfaux anger women has risen under Labour in Wales. Your faux anger is women has risen under Labour in Wales. Yourfaux anger is rubbish. Walas. Your faux anger is rubbish. Its Wales. Your faux anger is rubbish. Its genuine Wales. Yourfaux anger is rubbish. Its genuine anger about child poverty! You get the chance to run poverty! You get the chance to mn Wales poverty! You get the chance to run Wales and poverty! You get the chance to mn Wales and you poverty! You get the chance to run Wales and you are running it into Walas and you are mnning it into the ground, Wales and you are running it into the ground, and Labour’s four—day the ground, and Labour’s four-day week the ground, and Labour’s four—day week would have... You are losing the argument! 850,000 children... If there are more children in poverty because of your policies. Hang on, I am getting deafened. The one thing I don’t think you did, and Hamza don’t think you did, and Hamu Howie, was don’t think you did, and Hamza Howie, was answer the question. Is the fall in life expectancy proof that austerity kills, is the author of the report suggests? Is it proof? I don’t agree with Lord bird’s point... Is it proof or isn’t it? We had to balance the books. You didn’t have to balance the books. If you crash the economy, you hurt the weakness. This is rubbish! There are a whole group of people who say that a whola group of peopla who say that you ran trade a whole group of people who say that you can trade out of austerity. We you ran trade out of austerity. We went into you can trade out of austerity. We went into the Second World War with not a penny in our pockets and, by the end of it, we created an economy where, if you borrow, spend to save. That is the answer. And you, for ideological reasons, went down the road of what we are going to do is live within our Thatcherite means, and that helped to destroy the prosperity of Britain. We borrowed our way out of it in the Second World War. For every £4 we were spending, we were borrowing a plan. Today, for every £22 we spent, we borrow a pound. That is responsible. THEY SPEAK OVER EACH OTHER. Austerity is not the answer to every problem in the world. Our society has become more decadent and developed, and you seem again and again people become more secondary again peopla become more secondary and again people become more secondary and depressed, communities become more fragmented, they would turn more to abusive substances that make them ill. As the lady over there was saying, her them ill. As the lady over there was saying, herfamily went them ill. As the lady over there was saying, her family went through all kinds of probation and suffering, they are as strong as Oxis. It’s a far more complex question. The world is changing, and austerity is not a silver bullet. That is what the author of silver bullet. That is what the author of the report said, and he blamed austerity. Next week, we will be in Tunbridge Wells, and the following week is Budget weak and we will be in West Bromwich. If you want to come and be in the audience, all us on want to come and be in the audience, callus on this number or go to the all us on this number or go to the website. ﬂ I think we can talk about that I think we ran talk about that report in the I think we can talk about that report in the north probably for the whole hour, but there are a lot of other questions, so in fairness I am going to move on and take a question from Raymond Latus. After today’s from Raymond latus. After todars court ruling, from Raymond Latus. After today’s court ruling, should Heathrow expansion go—ahead for trade benefits or be stopped for environmental reasons? Right, you supported a third runway? So should it go ahead? supported a third runway? 50 should it go ahead? Well, I think we need to aviation investment in this country. The same time, we need to make sure we meet our climate challenge of net zero by 2050. I am the Business Minister, so a couple of weeks ago I had a roundtable with the Prince of Wales, the whole aviation industry, and we are looking to target to produce an aircraft that can carry 180 people aircraft that ran rarry180 peopla to a 500 aircraft that can carry 180 people to a 500 mile radius, so it covers most of Europe, which will be fully elactric. most of Europe, which will be fully electric. So will a third runway elactric. So will a third runway go-ahead? electric. So will a third runway go—ahead? Heathrow is a private go-ahead? Heathrow is a private country, and go—ahead? Heathrow is a private country, and that investment is being made by a private company. —— being made by a private company. -- private company. being made by a private company. —— private company. The legal challenge today was successful, so I would not want to comment on the legal situation. The view of the government is that aviation is incredibly important. In our levelling up, the question is, is it important for trade? And it is. Nick should it go ahead? After today’s should it go ahead? After todars court ruling, should it go ahead? After today’s court ruling, should Heathrow expansion go—ahead for trade benefits. For environmental reasons? with benefits. For environmental reasons? With Heathrow and the legal challenge, I can’t comment on that. challange, I can’t comment on that. For challenge, I can’t comment on that. For aviation across the UK, absolutely, we need to invest in it as well as to meet our very, very ambitious targets for net zero by 2050. We will be co—chairing COP26, 2050. We will be co-chairing (ions, the 2050. We will be co—chairing COP26, the climate summit, in Glasgow this year, the end of the year, and we have to make sure we do both of those things and do them well. A lot of the innovation is happening within my department, and we are investing to make sure we have sustainable, clean aviation. I hear sustainable, dean aviation. I hear that, but sustainable, dean aviation. I hear that, butl sustainable, clean aviation. I hear that, but I also hear you are not answering the question. I said aviation has to grow. You are saying you don’t have a view on Heathrow expanding! I think the environment or site is extremely important and dearty we or site is extremely important and clearly we need do something dearty we need do something regarding clearly we need do something regarding that, and we shouldn’t underplay how serious that challenges for the globe, but personally I think it should go ahead because, without a strong economy, without the investment needed to sustain that future, we won’t have that environment. The woman in the middle. Does Gatwick Airport not reduce the emissions if you move it there? Did I read that today? We are checking that. If there is to be any investment, should not be in the north—east, one should not be in the north-east, one of the most should not be in the north—east, one of the most deprived areas of the country? -- of the most deprived areas of the country? —— should it not be. country? -- should it not be. Alison? I country? —— should it not be. Alison? I think today might go down as a really key date in this country, in its fightback for our planet, really. What this legal planet, really. what this legal mling has planet, really. What this legal ruling has meant is that any big mling has meant is that any big project now ruling has meant is that any big project now is going to have to have some consideration about the environmental impact, and we cannot environmental impact, and we rannot just pretend this environmental impact, and we cannot just pretend this stuff isn’t happening now. We have seen the ﬂoods happening now. We have seen the floods of the last few weeks. Elsewhere in the world, they have seen this kind of thing for years, and now it’s on our own front door, we cannot ignore it. We also have to think we rannot ignore it. We also have to think that we cannot ignore it. We also have to think that sometimes, yes, we need a strong economy, yes, we need jobs, and there are lots of strong economy, yes, we need jobs, and there are lots ofjobs to be had in the green industries, and lots of money to be made, but the people who money to be made, but the peopla who mn this country money to be made, but the people who run this country have got to say, mn this country have got to say, you know run this country have got to say, you know what, sometimes things are more important than money, like our children’s futures, our communities, there are things that matter more than making money, and I think it than making money, and Ithink it leaves us than making money, and I think it leaves us in a difficult position, because we know the Prime Minister must review on Heathrow was that he would must review on Heatth was that he would lay down must review on Heathrow was that he would lay down in front of bulldozers. This is a really big step forward for this country, as we finally make a stand about what is right for our future and our children’s futures. John Bird. Are children’s futures. john Bird. Are used to children’s futures. John Bird. Are used to live under the flight path, used to live under the ﬂight path, so I used to live under the flight path, so I suffered. It’s a terrible place to live if you live down on the Thames Valley there, with all the aeroplanes coming in and even more, but I think the real issue to me, and it’s why I’ve got a bill going through and it’s why I’ve got a hill going through the and it’s why I’ve got a bill going through the house called the wellbeing of future generations bill, and this is to try and get governments to grow up about not doing short—term things. It’s a doing short-term things. It’s a really doing short—term things. It’s a really interesting and exciting idea to have runway number three, because it’s short—term real boost to the it’s short-term real boost to the economy, very it’s short—term real boost to the economy, very quickly, but the long-term economy, very quickly, but the long—term effects are just devastating. You don’t want to be enlarging Heathrow. You don’t want to be enlarging all of the other airports around the country with the present technology. You need to be putting your money and your effort, like the American government are doing, putting an enormous amount of effort, especially in the military, around how to produce clean planes. around how to produce dean planes. That kind around how to produce clean planes. That kind of money is not being put in by their majesties government and has never really been seriously put in. If we want to do something sensible, we need to stop this generation destroying the next generation, so that the next generation has a poorer quality of life, and I think that is the real issue around whether we vote for a third runway. I would not go for a third runway. I’d spent the money on our schools and on our libraries and on our community in the north—east on our community in the north-east of England, and on our community in the north—east of England, and give our children the opportunity of having jobs which are not 5p, £10 an hour, but £50 an are not 5p, £10 an hour, but 50 an hour. If are not So, £10 an hour, but 50 an hour. If you are are not 5p, £10 an hour, but £50 an hour. If you are going to get somebody out of poverty, give them a bloody good job. APPLAUSE Yes. I am APPLAUSE Yes. lam really concerned APPLAUSE Yes. I am really concerned about [oral transport Yes. I am really concerned about local transport with Teesside [oral transport with Teesside airport, local transport with Teesside airport, and what the council has done, with business coming back to Teesside, and hopefully then bringing transport links back to the north-east, bringing transport links back to the north—east, where we haven’t had any north-east, where we haven’t had any for years. HSZ north—east, where we haven’t had any for years. HS2 totally bypassing the north—east. All that money that is north-east. All that money that is being piled north—east. All that money that is being piled into it, we are not going to benefit at all, so it should be invested into Teesside. So the third runway is an irrelevance, as far as you are concerned. The man in the white shirt with the glasses. Most peopla in the white shirt with the glasses. Most people in Middlesbrough don’t Most peopla in Middlesbrough don’t really rare or Most people in Middlesbrough don’t really care or know that much about really rare or know that much about what happens really care or know that much about what happens at Heathrow, but I think it’s wonderful that Teesside airport is being reclaimed, rejuvenated, and more services are being provided every week. You are baking it up for Teesside. Yes, the man at the front in the dark shirt. ﬂ I think technology is the way forward. As we have seen with cars developing batteries and other means, by the time this third runway is built, we will have cleaner planes, electric planes, and that will be the way forward. I don’t think you have to worry so much about the emissions because by the time it happens, technology will have taught time it happens, technology will have caught up and we will be in a better place. So I think it should go ahead. Ayesha? I think we should try to use what we have, upgrade it and make it more efficient, not try to use what we have, upgrade it and make it more efficient, notjust and make it more efficient, not just build more and make it more efficient, notjust build more and more things. But I am in favour of trying to spread out the centres for hubs of transport, like the lady was saying about Teesside airport. That is fantastic. I ﬂaw in Teesside airport. That is fantastic. I flew in from Dubai to Newcastle Iﬂew in from Dubai to Nemsﬂa this morning. I flew in from Dubai to Newcastle this morning. Fantastic airport, superefficient, great flight. The superefficient, great ﬂight. The whola superefficient, great flight. The whole thing works perfectly. And it whola thing works perfectly. And it is whole thing works perfectly. And it is because emirates is good and it ﬂies is because emirates is good and it flies there. What two other airlines ﬂies there. what two other airtines are of flies there. What two other airlines are of course available! Why aren’t are of course available! why aren’t more are of course available! Why aren’t more airlines doing that? Why are we more aidines doing that? why are we not make more airlines doing that? Why are we not make it more attractive so that peopla go to not make it more attractive so that people go to different hubs? They are not always going to London. That is why we want to make it more attractive for people to go to different places around the country. And what about the environment? The question was about trade benefits versus the environmental impact. where versus the environmental impact. Where does that stand in relation to where does that stand in relation to increasing Where does that stand in relation to increasing flights to other increasing ﬂights to other airports? increasing flights to other airports? It is not about increasing so much as redistributing flights. so much as redistributing ﬂights. Having so much as redistributing flights. Having fewer to London. And more going to [oral Having fewer to London. And more going to local hubs. I don’t think going to [oral hubs. I don’t think this is going to going to local hubs. I don’t think this is going to happen now. If the government wanted it to happen, it would be part of the appeal. There is an irony that the courts have come to a judgment that suits Boris johnson, for a come to a judgment that suits Boris Johnson, for a change. But I have johnson, for a change. But I have suddenly Johnson, for a change. But I have suddenly enough change my mind on Heathrow. I originally was persuaded of the arguments around trade and investment and the economic argument. I remember meeting some of the trade unions who represented the Heathrow workforce. But the more I have looked into it and the more I have researched it, I cannot see how it is compatible with our commitment to climate change. We cannot deny the challenge. With the flooding at the challenge. with the ﬂooding at the the challenge. With the flooding at the moment, we are seeing more and more extreme weather events. We have to get serious about the challenge of climate change and what that means for the future of humanity and the future of the planet. On those grounds, I hold my hands up and I am saying that a few years ago when I supported Heathrow, I saying that a few years ago when I supported Heathrow, Iwas saying that a few years ago when I supported Heathrow, I was wrong. saying that a few years ago when I supported Heathrow, Iwas wrong. Now I don’t think it should go ahead. jon, we are I don’t think it should go ahead. Jon, we are putting £2 billion into jon, we are putting £2 billion into aviation Jon, we are putting £2 billion into aviation research. I would love to invite you to show you what we are doing. You probably need 4 billion. I am so glad to hear people talking I am so glad to hear peopla talking about I am so glad to hear people talking about Teesside airport and what is being done in terms of offshore wind and the supply chain, but also our traditional industries like the steel industry. We have a big plan to decarbonise not steel industry. We have a big plan to decarbonise notjust transport, to dearbonise not just transport, but also to decarbonise notjust transport, but also steel to make the greenest steel in Europe. One more question from Chris Kelly. The government have promised to tackle the number of rough sleepers. As a Salvation Army officer in Middlesbrough, I Army officer in Middlasbrough, I have Army officer in Middlesbrough, I have seen an increase. When will we have seen an increase. when will we see that have seen an increase. When will we see that change? Chris, tell us about your experience of seeing rough sleeping in Middlesbrough. We operate out of Southfield Road. We are regularty operate out of Southfield Road. We are regularly inundated with people are regularty inundated with peopla who are regularly inundated with people who have to use our services to get food, to get clothing and other support, drug addicts. And you have support, dmg addicts. And you have seen an support, drug addicts. And you have seen an increase? We have seen an increase. There are people trying to sleep around the back of our church buildings, anywhere to get out of the cold and the elements. And it the cold and the elaments. And it has the cold and the elements. And it has increased, yet we are being told it is a decrease. Well, it has decreased this year by 9%. But it decreased this year by 996. But it has nearty decreased this year by 9%. But it has nearly tripled since the Conservatives, or since 2010, which was a coalition with the Conservatives, and then a Conservative government. John Bird, Conservative government. john Bird, you’re the Conservative government. John Bird, you’re the obvious person to talk to about this. In terms of the impact of rough sleeping on someone... I am of rough shaping on someone... I am an ex-rough of rough sleeping on someone... I am an ex—rough sleeper, and I can an ex-rough sleeper, and I ran honestly tell an ex—rough sleeper, and I can honestly tell you that it’s one of the worst things you can be doing. the worst things you ran be doing. If you are a the worst things you can be doing. If you are a rough sleeper for a couple of months, it takes years to get it out of you. Even a couple of weeks will disenfranchise you in many ways and confusing. many ways and confusing. —— confuse many ways and confusing. -- confuse you. I many ways and confusing. -- confuse you. lam an many ways and confusing. —— confuse you. I am an ex—offender who ended you. I am an ex-offender who ended “P you. I am an ex-offender who ended up on the streets, you. I am an ex—offender who ended up on the streets, hiding from the police and hiding from my family, so I wasn’t like a lot of the young peopla now. I wasn’t like a lot of the young people now. But I can honestly tell peopla now. But I ran honestly tell you that in people now. But I can honestly tell you that in those days, no one was allowed to sleep rough, because you got nicked. And if you got nicked, you went into prisons. And then after a few months, you were let out. That was a ridiculous situation, but the ridiculous situation we have now, where we have an overspill of the A&E department, we have an overspill of the social security office, we have an overspill of all the help that charities can give. 50 you have got charities ran give. So you have got this compound charities can give. 50 you have got this compound that is terrible. It is a human rights abuse, in my opinion, to let anybody sleep on the streets. I would not let one person sleep on the streets. I would create therapeutic communities, and I would give people places of safety where give P P Peo ty "h [e laces 01 sale are give people places of safety where you then sort out the problems. I you then sort out the problams. I would you then sort out the problems. I would transfer the whole argument to the idea that this is about social health and social well—being. But it health and social well-being. But it comes health and social well—being. But it comes out of austerity. We know it comes out of all the problems that comes out of all the problams that peopla have comes out of all the problems that people have had around Universal peopla have had around Universal Credit. people have had around Universal Credit. We know it comes out of the fact that the A&E departments are overfull. We know these things. The answer in my opinion is that we have to stop allowing people on the streets, and we have to give them an alternative, irrespective of whether they want to take it or not. They are in a health problem. They have mental and physical health problems mental and physical health problams and it is mental and physical health problems and it is an absolute abhorrence that we love people to live and die that we love peopla to live and die on that we love people to live and die on the streets. on the streets. The young woman with blonde hair? blonde hair? Personally, I have had experts with mental health and hearing this today, I think some of you are in a different world, saying you have come in from Dubai to Newcastle. In Middlesbrough, the Nemsﬂa. In Middlasbrough, the lack of Newcastle. In Middlesbrough, the lack of funding for mental health is destroying our communities. Even when you do seek help, I read somewhere that there have been three deaths recently in our mental health hospitals. So deaths recently in our mental health hospitals. 50 when people are hospitals. So when peopla are receiving hospitals. 50 when people are receiving help, they are being let down. It has destroyed our community. Addiction is on the rise. Mental health crises are on the rise in rough sleeping is on the rise. We need funding, and when are we going to get it? Alison? to get it? Alison? Again, it is the second time we have come back to the austerity issue today. Homelessness is a tragedy. Today was bitterly is a tragedy. Today was hitherty cold is a tragedy. Today was bitterly cold and I saw this young girl and cold and I saw this young girt and she was cold and I saw this young girl and she was set cold and I saw this young girl and she was satin a sleeping bag, which she was sat in a shaping bag, which was wet she was satin a sleeping bag, which was wet from the ground and she she was sat in a sleeping bag, which was wet from the ground and she was frozen. This should not be something we are seeing on our streets in one of the richest nations on earth. How is this happening? The work that the Salvation Army and those great charities do is fantastic, but it has to be more than that. There are so many issues coming into this. We have got abuse of drugs, we have lack of organisations that care for lack of organisations that rare for peopla and lack of organisations that care for people and we also have a massive peopla and we also have a massive housing crisis. people and we also have a massive housing crisis. Rough sleeping is housing crisis. Rough slaeping is the tip of housing crisis. Rough sleeping is the tip of the iceberg. That is what we see when we see people in we see when we see peopla in shaping we see when we see people in sleeping bags in doorways. Beneath shaping bags in doorways. Beneath that, sleeping bags in doorways. Beneath that, we have thousands of children living in temporary accommodation, sofa surfing. They have no stability, and all the mental health issues that go along that. This is going to cost billions of pounds to fix and a major overhaul of our housing system. We need homes for families to live in. Ayesha. Some of the audience think you are on a different planet. 5’ I can assure different planet. 5’ I ran assure you I am different planet. 5’ I ran assure you lam not, different planet. 5’ I can assure you I am not, though I do sometimes you lam not, though I do sometimes work in Dubai, you I am not, though I do sometimes work in Dubai, which means I do fly work in Dubai, which means I do ﬂy from Dubai. work in Dubai, which means I do fly from Dubai. But for work in Dubai, which means I do fly from Dubai. But fora work in Dubai, which means I do fly from Dubai. But for a long time, I from Dubai. But fora long time, I had from Dubai. But for a long time, I had a relationship with someone who had been made homeless when he was a child. So had been made homeless when he was a child. Sol had been made homeless when he was a child. 50 I was very aware of the child. So I was very aware of the destabilising child. 50 I was very aware of the destabilising effect that that can destabilising effect that that ran have destabilising effect that that can have on someone. I have been close to people who have been through that to peopla who have been through that sort of to people who have been through that sort of privation, and I couldn’t agree more that this is a disgrace within our highly developed, affluent society, to walk past afﬂuent society, to walk past peopla in affluent society, to walk past people in doorways, shivering. It is unbelievable. Something has to be done. We need to open up town halls. There just shouldn’t be another night that people don’t have somewhere to go at all times. I am 1001: somewhere to go at all times. I am 100% with somewhere to go at all times. I am 10096 with you somewhere to go at all times. I am 100% with you on that. Should 10096 with you on that. Should politicians 100% with you on that. Should politicians be ashamed about the destruction of the youth services that will exacerbate this problem? You think the lack of youth services is partly to blame. Jon? This is heartbreaking. Thank you, Chris, for the work you do with the Salvation Army. I know you will be out there in the cold at night time, looking after and supporting people in the after and supporting peopla in the most after and supporting people in the most desperate circumstances. There is a disagreement about the exact number, but I think we all know that the numbers of people sleeping rough the numbers of peopla shaping rough on our the numbers of people sleeping rough on our streets has gone sky high in the last ten years. We know local authorities have had their budgets dosed authorities have had their budgets closed and have often had to close closed and have often had to dose beds in closed and have often had to close beds in hospitals. We all know there are over 100,000 children pushed from pillar to post in temporary accommodation, not given a permanent home, not knowing where their next meal is coming from. This is surely a shameful stain on the soul of this country, when we are one of the wealthiest countries in the world. We should be getting a grip of this problem and putting more money in. The point that was made by someone in the audience about mental health services, we know that many of the people who are sleeping rough do peopla who are shaping rough do have a people who are sleeping rough do have a desperate need for proper mental health care. They are often mental health rare. They are often grappling mental health care. They are often grappling with a serious addiction problam, grappling with a serious addiction problem, whether it be substance problam, whether it be substance misuse problem, whether it be substance misuse or alcohol, and yet there health budgets for drug and alcohol health budgets for dmg and alcohol have health budgets for drug and alcohol have been decimated under the Tories. Indeed, every local Tories. Indeed, every [oral authority in Tories. Indeed, every local authority in the country still doesn’t know what its budget will be this April because the government have not got around to telling them. It is a disgrace. The government have to do something. Nadhim, you can’t be happy that rough sleeping can’t be happy that rough shaping has hearty can’t be happy that rough sleeping has nearly tripled since 2010. It is has nearty tripled since 2010. It is unacceptable has nearly tripled since 2010. It is unacceptable that anyone should be sleeping rough in our country. Do shaping rough in our country. Do you take sleeping rough in our country. Do you take responsibility for it? We do, and today we announced an additional £236 million to deliver another 6000 places in accommodation for peoplc who another 6000 places in accommodation for people who are sleeping rough, for peopla who are shaping rough, bringing the for people who are sleeping rough, bringing the total to 1.2 billion now. The lady asked about mental health. You are right. I have seen it when I was children’s minister. There is some excellent work being done. I went to Leeds council, who put wraparound services around anyone before they even become homeless and a rough sleeper, because there are signs. One of them is obviously mental health. And they put a team around them to keep them in their accommodation. So there are good examples and we are learning from that and putting more money into it. The prime minister is committed to this. I want every child to wake up in their own home and have a healthy meal I go to school and do all the things that we want for our own children. The Salvation Army do phenomenal work, but we have got to tackle this. but we have got to tackle this. We but we have got to tackla this. We have put but we have got to tackle this. We have put another £34 billion of additional spending to the NHS. Mental health budgets are going up as well. And the largest increase in a decade into local government that a decade into [oral government that we have just a decade into local government that we have just announced. a decade into local government that we havejust announced. But a decade into local government that we have just announced. But it is not just about money, we have just announced. But it is notjust about money, it is learning not just about money, it is learning from the notjust about money, it is learning from the best examples, learning what works and then putting in that wraparound service. You see it in [oral wraparound service. You see it in local authorities. Leeds cut down [oral authorities. Leeds cut down their local authorities. Leeds cut down their homelessness by a third because of the level of work they have put in. That is what we need to invest in and we are making that investment. We announced the additional 236 million today. Our time is up, I’m afraid. Lots of you have your hands up, so forgive me for not coming to you. Next week, we will be in Tunbridge Wells. The following week, we will be in West Bromwich, so do come and join us. (“all if you West Bromwich, so do come and join us. Call if you want to be in the us. (“all if you want to be in the audience, or go us. Call if you want to be in the audience, or go to the website. If you want to carry audience, or go to the website. If you want to carry on the topic of conversation or the others we have been talking about tonight, you can been talking about tonight, you ran have your say been talking about tonight, you can have your say with Adrian Chiles and guests on Question Time extra time. But here in the spring, thank you to the panel. Thank you to all of you for your questions and the points you have made, and thank you to you at home for watching and listening. From Middlesbrough, bye—bye.