Welcome to Question Time. Tonight, on tonight’s programme Chris Philp, eluted on tonight’s programme Chris Philp, elected in 2015 after a career in eluted in 2015 after a career in business, elected in 2015 after a career in business, currently responsible for immigration and compliance. Labour’s immigration and compliance. Laboqu Shadow immigration and compliance. Labour’s Shadow Home Secretary Nick Thomas Simmons. Marie van der Zyl, employment lawyer and president of the Board of Deputies of British jews. the Board of Deputies of British Jews. Joining us from New York, jaws. joining us from New York, American Jews. Joining us from New York, American financier, Jews. Joining us from New York, Americanfinancier, Republican Jews. Joining us from New York, American financier, Republican and very brieﬂy American financier, Republican and very briefly White House head of communications under Donald Trump, communications under Donald Tmmp, Anthony communications under Donald Trump, Anthony Scaramucci. And Chicago born Anthony Saramucci. And Chicago born and bred, now Anthony Scaramucci. And Chicago born and bred, now living in the UK, playwright, broadcaster and critic, Bonnie Greer. Good evening, welcome to my guests in the studio and Nick and Anthony who are joining us down the line. Welcome to our audience tonight, you are from Lincoln. Very good to see you joining us virtually. Thank you for good to see you joining us virtually. Thank you forjoining us. virtually. Thank you for joining us. join in the virtually. Thank you forjoining us. Join in the conversation in the join in the conversation in the usual way, Join in the conversation in the usual way, you know how, on social media. Let’s get started with our first question tonight which is from David Lane. David Lane. Good evening, Pannell. Good evening, Pannell. In view of the report released today by the Equalities and Human Rights Commission, which identified serious failings by the Labour Party in dealing with anti—semitic racism, should just one individual be held to account? Chris? It is a damning report, it finds the Labour Party acted unlawfully. It finds that finds the Labour Party acted unlawfully. It finds thatJeremy unlawfully. It finds that jeremy Corbyn’s unlawfully. It finds thatJeremy Corbyn’s office effectively covered “P Corbyn’s office effectively covered up 23 Corbyn’s office effectively covered up 23 different allegations of anti—Semitism. But I think it goes anti-Semitism. But I think it goes beyond anti—Semitism. But I think it goes beyond Jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir beyond jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir Starmer beyond Jeremy Corbyn. I think Keir Starmer has questions to answer himself. Because for five years Keir Starmer sat on the Labour front Starmer sat on the labour front bench Starmer sat on the Labour front bench and said nothing while this bench and said nothing whila this was going on. bench and said nothing while this was going on. I didn’t hear him condemning this activity are holding jeremy condemning this activity are holding Jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike many other Jeremy Corbyn to account, unlike many other Labour MPs and many many other labour MPs and many labour many other Labour MPs and many Labour frontbenchers, many other Labour MPs and many Labourfrontbenchers, he did not labour frontbenchers, he did not resign. He said Labourfrontbenchers, he did not resign. He said nothing and he defended Jeremy Corbyn and he defended jeremy Corbyn and he promoted defended Jeremy Corbyn and he promoted Jeremy Corbyn as a promoted jeremy Corbyn as a potential promoted Jeremy Corbyn as a potential prime minister less than a year ago. I think Keir Starmer needs to do two things if he is serious about fixing this. Firstly, he should apologise personally for his failure to speak out on this issue when he was on the front bench. It was convenient for him to sit there and stay quiet in the hope that he would take over as leader rather cynically. Secondly, it is not would take over as leader rather cynically. Secondly, it is notjust cynically. Secondly, it is not just to suspend cynically. Secondly, it is notjust to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, he should to suspend jeremy Corbyn, he should kick jeremy to suspend Jeremy Corbyn, he should kickJeremy Corbyn out of the Labour kick jeremy Corbyn out of the labour Party because kickJeremy Corbyn out of the Labour Party because this report is so damning. Jeremy Corbyn’s response to damning. jeremy Corbyn’s response to it, saying it had damning. Jeremy Corbyn’s response to it, saying it had been hugely exaggerated for political purposes, was disgraceful. Keir Starmer needs to do both of those things if he is serious. The report found political interference in anti—Semitism interference in anti-Semitism complaints. interference in anti—Semitism complaints. It did not use the word cover. Nick, this is not a comfortable day for you. You were also part of the front bench during all of this. What do you have to all of this. what do you have to say? Firstly, all of this. What do you have to say? Firstly, this is a shameful day for the Labour Party. We accept the for the labour Party. We accept the findings of the for the Labour Party. We accept the findings of the equality and human rights report in the entirety and we will act on the recommendations. But first and foremost I want to acknowledge the hurt that has been caused to the acknowledge the hurt that has been caused to theJewish community over caused to the jewish community over the past five caused to theJewish community over the past five years. Keir Starmer has expressed our profound sorrow for this. We are profoundly sorry for that hurt that has been caused. Todars report for that hurt that has been caused. Today’s report is an appalling, Todars report is an appalling, damning Today’s report is an appalling, damning report that is before us, but we now have to act upon the recommendations of that report. I never thought I would be sitting on your show after the last Labour your show after the last labour government your show after the last Labour government created the Equality and Human Rights Commission and actually be speaking about an investigation of findings into the Labour Party offindings into the labour Party itself, but of findings into the Labour Party itself, but that is where we are. We will now work to ensure that, yes, our complaints processes are improved, that they are independent, they are where they should be, but we will do more than that. The answer to this is not we will do more than that. The answer to this is notjust about answer to this is not just about process, answer to this is notjust about process, important though that is, it is about changing the culture of our party so it is a place where everybody feels welcome and everybody feel safe. What Keir Starmer has done today with a decisive speech of moral clarity is to show the way towards that. I know there is a long way to go. But his speech and our commitment to taking action on this is the start of that road. Talking of moral clarity, one of the things that upset many in the jewish of the things that upset many in the Jewish community is a Labour’s jewish community is a Labour’s refusal Jewish community is a Labour’s refusal to accept in full the International Holocaust remembrance alliance was back definition of anti—Semitism in 2018. You endorsed anti-Semitism in 2018. You endorsed that anti—Semitism in 2018. You endorsed that decision not to accept it. He went out on the airwaves defending the decision not to accept it. labour the decision not to accept it. Labour changed its position the decision not to accept it. Labour changed its positionjust two labour changed its position just two months Labour changed its positionjust two months later. I don’t think that is a fair characterisation of what I said that day. What I said that day said that day. what I said that day was the said that day. What I said that day was the abuse that was being referred to, the appalling anti—Semitic abuse, whatever was in anti-Semitic abuse, whatever was in the mle book, anti—Semitic abuse, whatever was in the rule book, was absolutely wrong the NI; book, was absolutely wrong and had the rule book, was absolutely wrong and had to be dealt with. I also said the NEC was right to look again at the decision they made not to adopt all of the examples that went with the definition. But you did not accept all those examples, Nick. You went out on the Today programme and on the airwaves explaining that labour on the airwaves explaining that Labour should not accept all those labour should not accept all those examples as Labour should not accept all those examples as part of that definition. No, that is an unfair characterisation of what I said in the interview, with respect, Fiona. What I said was the NEC were right what I said was the NEC were right to look What I said was the NEC were right to look at it again because of the decision they made. They had to look at it again and they made the right decision. Look, I at it again and they made the right decision. Look, Iwill at it again and they made the right decision. Look, Iwillspeak at it again and they made the right decision. Look, I will speak about the fact that I raised the issue of anti—Semitism with members of the anti-Semitism with members of the Shadow anti—Semitism with members of the Shadow Cabinet, I was not in the Shadow Cabinet. I also said when I was out on the media that more action had to be taken on anti—Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke anti-Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke with a anti—Semitism. Keir Starmer spoke with a cabinet about it and to the media. But the reality is we all have to accept today the failure of collective leadership, that is what collactive leadership, that is what that collective leadership, that is what that report makes absolutely clear. that report makes absolutely dear. I am not that report makes absolutely clear. I am not shying away from it, I accept totally that report. Today we are under this new leadership with Keir Starmer, we have made tackling anti—Semitism at the very top anti-Semitism at the very top priority. But I anti—Semitism at the very top priority. But I have always asked to be judged on priority. But I have always asked to bejudged on actions, not priority. But I have always asked to be judged on actions, not words. priority. But I have always asked to bejudged on actions, not words. I be judged on actions, not words. I see today as bejudged on actions, not words. I see today as the start of that and Keir Starmer is showing this morning through that speech what we are now going to do and what we will now do to try to ensure that the scourge of anti—Semitism is driven out of our anti-Semitism is driven out of our party and it is a anti—Semitism is driven out of our party and it is a safe and welcoming place, which is the Labour Party I place, which is the labour Party I want to place, which is the Labour Party I want to see. Keir Starmer had five years to take action and in those five years in the Shadow Cabinet supporting Jeremy Corbyn he did supporting jeremy Corbyn he did nothing, he supporting Jeremy Corbyn he did nothing, he should apologise for that. Can I nothing, he should apologise for that. Can Ijust say I want to talk that. (“an I just say I want to talk about that. Can Ijust say I want to talk about trauma because sometimes politicians talk about issues and they talk about things that call they talk about things that all cold they talk about things that call cold and they do not talk about things that are hot and one of those trauma. I am a former deputy chair of the British Museum and I was invited a year—and—a—half ago by the invited a year-and-a-half ago by the director to invited a year—and—a—half ago by the director to create a project around around reclamation. We decided to look at African enslavement and the enslavement of people of African ancestry. And to look at trauma, the trauma that people can hold inside trauma that peopla ran hold inside of trauma that people can hold inside of themselves, even if you did not experience it yourself. It is handed down by generation to generation to generation to generation, and it is real. And for me if a black person tells me they are not safe, they don’t feel safe in an environment, they feel it is racist and it is racist, I listen. We have to listen because of that trauma of enslavement. I am going to say the same thing about the enslavement. I am going to say the same thing about theJewish people. same thing about the jewish peopla. If jewish same thing about theJewish people. IfJewish people tell you someplace If jewish peopla tell you someplace is IfJewish people tell you someplace is unsafe for them, they don’t feel good, it feels bad, they are holding trauma and we have to understand that. We have to begin to talk about that. People may think it is trivial or it didn’t exist or it doesn’t mean anything, but the Holocaust was the greatest crime of the 20th century and we need to teach it in the schools and we need to understand it at every level that exists, just as we need to understand the transatlantic slave trade and its impact on people of trade and its impact on peopla of African trade and its impact on people of African descent today. We need to understand the Holocaust and what it means to understand the Holocaust and what it means toJewish people and to those means to jewish peopla and to those of us who means toJewish people and to those of us who are not means toJewish people and to those of us who are notJewish. And for of us who are not jewish. And for the labour of us who are notJewish. And for the Labour Party I cannot even the labour Party I cannot even express how the labour Party I cannot even express howl the Labour Party I cannot even express how I feel, at the Labour express how I feel, at the labour Party is taught express how I feel, at the Labour Party is caught up in this. I am a labour voter and I will always vote labour, I labour voter and I will always vote Labour, I became a citizen so I labour, I became a citizen so I could vote Labour, I became a citizen so I could vote Labour and I will always could vote labour and I will always vote for could vote Labour and I will always vote for the Labour Party because I vote for the labour Party because I think it is vote for the Labour Party because I think it is the best coalition of the left for this country. But for this party to be caught up in something like this makes me sick and I don’t want to hear it, I don’t want to hear all the other stuff. It needs to be dealt with immediately at the top with immediate due diligence. Whether at the top with immediate due diligence. WhetherJeremy is an anti—Semite or what, how would I anti-Semite or what, how would I know anti—Semite or what, how would I know that? He doesn’t seem like one to me, but how would I know? The peopla who to me, but how would I know? The people who know other people who peopla who know other peopla who feel it people who know other people who feel it and that is who we should be listening to. Marie. It has been an incredibly painful day, it is a damning incitement of labour. This is really serious. The report has found that the Labour Party has committed unlawful acts of harassment and victimisation against jewish harassment and victimisation against Jewish people. It does not get any jewish peopla. It does not get any worse Jewish people. It does not get any worse than that, does it? And we felt during this time people were making allegations that raising this, as Bonnie said, were smears, some kind of deliberate action. And the jewish some kind of deliberate action. And theJewish community did not want the jewish community did not want this fight, but theJewish community did not want this fight, but we had to stand up, we had to say this was wrong and we were proud to do that. And today is a damning indictment, as I have said. What has happened during the said. what has happened during the course of said. What has happened during the course of the last few years is that anti—Semitism was on the fringes of anti-Semitism was on the fringes of society and it anti—Semitism was on the fringes of society and it has been brought straight into mainstream politics straight into mainstream politic into straight into mainstream politics into the political party. Jeremy into the political party. jeremy Corbyn and into the political party. Jeremy Corbyn and his leadership made a political decision to ignore, not to tackla, political decision to ignore, not to tackle, anti—Semitism. That is so tackla, anti-Semitism. That is so appalling, it is tackle, anti—Semitism. That is so appalling, it is not imaginable in appalling, it is not imaginabla in this day and appalling, it is not imaginable in this day and age. The leadership did nothing about it and here we are today talking all these years later when this could have been resolved. And not only did the leadership of the party not do anything about it, we have now got findings of interference, political interference by the leader’s office. It does not get much worse than that, does it? (“an I ask you, get much worse than that, does it? Can I ask you, Jeremy Corbyn has (“an I ask you, jeremy Corbyn has said again Can I ask you, Jeremy Corbyn has said again today that he was not anti—Semitic and anybody who says anti-Semitic and anybody who says there anti—Semitic and anybody who says there was not a problem with anti—Semitism in labour it was anti-Semitism in labour it was wrong. But anti—Semitism in labour it was wrong. But the question is should just one individual be held to account? It is a question of the culture in the party. The problem with anti—Semitism runs deep. This with anti-Semitism runs deep. This is going to be with anti—Semitism runs deep. This is going to be the beginning of a very long journey. is going to be the beginning of a very longjourney. It is going to be the beginning of a very long journey. It is all very well the Labour Party saying sorry well the labour Party saying sorry and Keir well the Labour Party saying sorry and Keir Starmer did give an apology on the day he was elected, but what is important here is that we see action. Words are only so much, we need to see that the action plan is implemented by the 10th of December and there need to be key changes across the party. We need an independent disciplinary process, education, and to tackle that education, and to tackla that culture. education, and to tackle that culture. And this is going to be something that is not going to change overnight. There is a lot of pain and a lot of hurt. It is not one person’s fault but pain and a lot of hurt. It is not one person’s fault butJeremy Corbyn one person’s fault butjeremy Corbyn allowed one person’s fault butJeremy Corbyn allowed the space for anti—Semites allowed the space for anti-Semites to come allowed the space for anti—Semites to come into the party and the leadership did absolutely nothing about it. Let’s hear leadership did absolutely nothing about it. Let’s hearfrom our about it. Let’s hear from our audience. about it. Let’s hearfrom our audience. Jane. Hello, like audience. jane. Hello, like everybody I audience. Jane. Hello, like everybody I have been horrified by this story. We had today that the labour Party this story. We had today that the Labour Party are accountable, but labour Party are accountabla, but really they are Labour Party are accountable, but really they are an entity and surely there must be some individuals to be held accountable. Are there any legal redress is that will ensure that the people behind this are that the peopla behind this are found that the people behind this are found accountable? It is one thing being expelled from your political Party. being expelled from your political party, but to me that is not enough for the situation that has happened. To drag hate crime into politics is To drag hate crime into politic is a pretty To drag hate crime into politics is a pretty serious thing and so against the British way of life. Paula? I want to come back on Nick’s point when he said don’t Paula? I want to come back on Nick’s point when he said don’tjudge my point when he said don’t judge my words, judged point when he said don’tjudge my words, judged by actions. Prejudice words, judged byactions. Prejudice is displayed words, judged by actions. Prejudice is displayed through words and words do matter. I want to come back to Chris because he has very quickly gone in and criticised Keir Starmer, but I would remind him that the Conservative Party has also been accused of racism against people of accused of racism against peopla of Islamic accused of racism against people of Islamic faith, so when people look Islamic faith, so when peopla look forward Islamic faith, so when people look forward to an investigation into their practices and see some apologies from them. We are still waiting for a report from the Conservative Party into prejudice, it was announced last year. When it was announced last year. when will we it was announced last year. When will we see it? That report is under way, it is independent and has been conducted by a former commissioner. when will conducted by a former commissioner. When will we see it? I can’t give when will we see it? I can’t give you a day, the When will we see it? I can’t give you a day, the work is under way. But there is only one political party in history that has been investigated by the Equality and Human Rights Commission and that is the Labour Party on the anti—Semite the labour Party on the anti-Semite issue. The the Labour Party on the anti—Semite issue. The Conservatives have appointed the most diverse government in British history and we are the first party to have appointed an ethnic minority Chancellor of the Exchequer. We were the first party to appoint an ethnic minority Home Secretary and we have appointed the most diverse cabinet as a symbol of our commitment to this important issue. Bowler—mac gravy—mac that is what Bowlar-mac gravy-mac that is what they used to Bowler—mac gravy—mac that is what they used to say to folk when they were de—segregating their neighbourhoods. "We have a black person in our neighbourhood, so we are cool. We are all white. —— you are cool. We are all white. -- you know, that is are cool. We are all white. —— you know, that is what they used to say to folk. Baroness pharmacy has been on you, not you, personally, but in her party, the Conservative Party for years -- her party, the Conservative Party for years —— Baroness Farsi. There for years -- Baroness Farsi. There is for years —— Baroness Farsi. There is housework for years -- Baroness Farsi. There is housework you for years —— Baroness Farsi. There is housework you need to be doing too, and putting people of colour in too, and putting peopla of colour in the too, and putting people of colour in the cabinet does not erase that fact. (“an the cabinet does not erase that fact. Can I the cabinet does not erase that fact. Can Ijust... Go ahead, but I fact. (“an Ijust... Go ahead, butl need to bring in fact. Can Ijust... Go ahead, but I need to bring in Anthony. I was going to say the Tories do need to acknowledge there is a problem with Islamophobia in the Tory Party, and they do acknowledge the need to do something about it. The Board of deputies did input into the report, but we need to look at scale. The BNP have also been investigated by the EHRC, but so many people in the the EHRC, but so many peopla in the labour Party the EHRC, but so many people in the Labour Party have been investigated. labour Party have been investigated. You are Labour Party have been investigated. You are not seeing from the Conservative Party MPs fleeing from Conservative Party MPs ﬂeeing from the party, Conservative Party MPs fleeing from the party, Leica pregnant women and the party, Leira pregnant women and the labour the party, Leica pregnant women and the Labour Party conference, and she the labour Party conference, and she even had the Labour Party conference, and she even had to have security. Louise Ullman, who had to flee the party Ullman, who had to ﬂee the party after 55 years, Ullman, who had to flee the party after 55 years, so you are not seeing the same level of scale even though issues to be addressed in the Conservative Party. How is this looking to you on the other side of the Atlantic, to bring you an here? I’m going to say thank God —— not I’m going to say thank God -- not going to say I’m going to say thank God —— not going to say thank God I’m not involved in British politics, I have involved in British politic, I have my own involved in British politics, I have my own problems on the side of the pond. And I mean this very respectfully to Chris, but this is what I would say. I am relating what Bonnie is saying about tokenism, and I think what we find in our society, we have to break down the systemic and institutional racism. If the racists think you are a racist, guess what, you are a racist. If anti—Semites think you are an anti—Semite, you likely are an anti—Semite, and even if you are not anti-Semite, and even if you are not doing it anti—Semite, and even if you are not doing it intentionally there are systemic and institutional biases and I think Bonnie’s point, which I would like to hammer, you can’t say, "Oneof my best would like to hammer, you can’t say, "OneOf my best friends is black and therefore I am not a racist" "OneOf my best friends is black and therefore I am not a racist", you just can’t do that, it is tokenism. We have to do what Doctor Martin Luther King Junior said a We have to do what Doctor Martin Luther King Junior said along We have to do what Doctor Martin Luther King Junior said a long time Luther King junior said a long time ago, judge Luther King Junior said a long time ago, judge each other by the content of our character and not the colour of her skin. Either way, of our character and not the colour of herskin. Eitherway, I of our character and not the colour of her skin. Either way, I grew up in a very patriarchal Italian American immigrant family, so you are also biased by the way you grew up. It is important for you to seek that enlightenment and make that transformation, and we need to do it as a culture and civilisation. It has to be at the institutional lavel. It has to be at the institutional level. It has to be at the Labour lavel. It has to be at the labour and level. It has to be at the Labour and Conservative level, frankly. These appointments I mentioned eartier These appointments I mentioned earlier are not tokenistic. Chris... eartier are not tokenistic. Chris... Chris, Chris, it’s earlier are not tokenistic. Chris... Chris, Chris, it’s important, Chris, because it’s important for you, berause it’s important for you, berause because it’s important for you, because you’re a good guy. What we because you’re a good guy. what we are saying to because you’re a good guy. What we are saying to you, it doesn’t matter, 0K? What matters is what you matter, 0K? what matters is what you do. That’s matter, 0K? What matters is what you do. That’s what we are saying. It doesn’t matter you have a black and brown cabinet. It doesn’t matter. That’s what people in the streets are about now. It doesn’t matter. It’s what you do, and if you pursue policies and stay the same way, you could have whatever. It don’t matter. That is what I am trying to say, and it’s important for you to get it inside. She means it respectfully, too, and I want to get that in. I don’t know if I do... She is giving you the benefit of the doubt. You’re not racist. She is trying to tell you you’re in a web, and you need to see things the way minority see them. My point was my colleagues in Government are not there for reasons of tokenism but they are there because they are incredibly talented, hard—working, incredibly talented, hard-working, energetic and incredibly talented, hard—working, energetic and dynamic people and of course I understand we have to dismantle any barriers to anyone achieving their potential because, in the words of Martin Luther King junior, who in the words of Martin Luther King Junior, who Anthony quoted a go, junior, who Anthony quoted a go, what Junior, who Anthony quoted a go, what matters is the content of someone’s what matters is the content of someone’s character, their ability and talent. I never used the word token. You did. You used it twice. Someone did. He did. It wasn’t me. I think we need to concentrate a bit more on the Labour Party anti—Semitism because when you look anti-Semitism because when you look at what jeremy anti—Semitism because when you look at whatJeremy Corbyn did this at whatjeremy Corbyn did this morning in at whatJeremy Corbyn did this morning in his speech he totally tried to say it wasn’t so important. We even tried to suggest he had made improvements, and he is someone who has to accept responsibility, and I think the lessons from the Labour think the lassons from the labour Party are what think the lessons from the Labour Party are what we should be really focusing on today. Let’s hear more from our audience. Lots of hands up. Going back to the culture of the labour Party, Going back to the culture of the Labour Party, I think since the labour Party, I think since the appointment Labour Party, I think since the appointment of Keir Starmer I think he really has stamped a clear message regarding it. OK, yes, we can’t turn back what has happened, but hopefully... With the message he but hopefully... with the message he has sent out, but hopefully... With the message he has sent out, and we just saw some of Rebeca has sent out, and we just saw some of Rebecca Long—Bailey, early doors, of Rebeca Long-Bailay, earty doors, I think of Rebecca Long—Bailey, early doors, I think that hopefully sends a clear message going forward. Alex? Is a young person brought up and talked about the horrors of the Holocaust -- as a young about the horrors of the Holocaust —— as a young person. I feel it is -- as a young person. I feel it is absolutely —— as a young person. I feel it is absolutely ludicrous things like this are still happening in today’s this are still happening in todars politic and this are still happening in today’s politics and people need to be held accountable. I agree. Absolutely. accountabla. Iagree. Absolutely. You accountable. I agree. Absolutely. You don’t expect anti—Semitism in You don’t expect anti-Semitism in the opposition You don’t expect anti—Semitism in the opposition party. It is unimaginable, let alone being found guilty of victimisation and harassment. Miles? Good evening. I think it’s a terrible shame to see what the Labour Party did, but as what the labour Party did, but as MP5 how what the Labour Party did, but as MP5 how are we going to change that MPs how are we going to change that in future so there is no hate crime in any political party anywhere, and for anybody who does work for the Government, who wants to become a Member of Parliament, they know they Member of Partiament, they know they are safe Member of Parliament, they know they are safe where they are working? Let’s have a final word from you. One question was about, is any legal action going to be taken against anyone in the Labour Party? How are anyone in the labour Party? How are you going to anyone in the Labour Party? How are you going to change the culture within the party from here on in? Firstly, since Keir Starmer became the leader I think it is nearly up the leader I think it is nearty up to about the leader I think it is nearly up to about 300 cases dealt with in our complaints system. That, just to give a sense, it is more than in the whole of 2019. Clearly Keir has been whole of 2019. Cleariy Keir has been trying to make whole of 2019. Clearly Keir has been trying to make progress on individuals held to account since he became leader. But asking very specifically, any prospect of legal action being taken against anyone in the party, given the report out today? Well, look, I can’t comment on whether individuals want to take legal action on particular bits of the report, but obviously, number one, I the report, but obviously, number one, Isay the report, but obviously, number one, I say we will of course be holding people to account. That’s holding peopla to account. That’s why we are holding people to account. That’s why we are going to improve our complaints system, and Marie asked me very fairty complaints system, and Marie asked me very fairly about how we will do me very fairty about how we will do that going me very fairly about how we will do that going forward. We have to put an action plan together now by the 10th of December. We will be reaching out, and Marie knows this, to the board of deputies, the reaching out, and Marie knows this, to the board of deputies, theJewish to the board of deputies, the jewish labour to the board of deputies, theJewish labour movement and the wider to the board of deputies, theJewish labour movement and the widerJewish labour movement and the widerjewish community as labour movement and the widerJewish community as we do that, to make sure we do have a system and there is no political interference, that it is property is no political interference, that it is properly resourced and people it is property resourced and people are property it is properly resourced and people are properly trained, it is transparent, that it has proper mles transparent, that it has proper rules about what sanctions are mles about what sanctions are appropriate rules about what sanctions are appropriate so everyone can have confidence in it, but as I say there is a wider question here. That process is vitally important and we will put it in place but there is a fair challenge, too, about changing fair challange, too, about changing the culture, fair challenge, too, about changing the culture, and we change the culture through leadership. We change it through leadership by what Keir Starmer has been staying and doing over the past six months. One of the reasons I backed Keir doing over the past six months. One of the reasons I backed Keirfour of the reasons I backed Keir four leader of the reasons I backed Keirfour leader while those conversations I had with him about his determination to tackla had with him about his determination to tackle this issue —— for leader. to tackle this issue -- for leader. He set that to tackle this issue —— for leader. He set that out and made it a policy in his acceptance speech back in April and in his acceptance speech hack in April and he in his acceptance speech back in April and he has been putting that into action since and it is that leadership that will be vital to bring about that cultural change we need. Maria is absolutely right to 55V need. Maria is absolutely right to say it won’t happen overnight but we are determined to make it happen and work at it. I will take another question in a moment, but before we do that I want to say we are looking for peopla to do that I want to say we are looking for people tojoin do that I want to say we are looking for people to join our virtual audience in the programme is coming up. Next week we are in Lewisham in south-east up. Next week we are in Lewisham in south—east London, virtually of south-east London, virtually of course. south—east London, virtually of course. The week after we are in Dover. If you live in either of those two places or they’re about to those two places or therre about to get in touch on those two places or they’re about to get in touch on the Question Time website. You can fill in the form website. You ran fill in the form and be part of website. You can fill in the form and be part of the audience. We would love to see you. Do come and be part of it. Right, let’s take our second question now, from Helen. Given the global importance of the USA, should people in the UK be concerned that the real choice Americans appear to have is to vote for who they consider is the least worst candidate for the role of President? , white and I will ,white and I will come to , white and I will come to you first. -- , white and I will come to you first. —— Anthony, country first. first. -- Anthony, country first. What first. -- Anthony, country first. what is your first. —— Anthony, country first. What is your view? We get two what is your view? We get two choices -- What is your view? We get two choices —— I will come to you first. choices -- I will come to you first. To my choices, choices —— I will come to you first. To my choices, some of it a calibration exactly of what she is saying and I agree it is the least of the two evils, if you will. But it is totally different this time. We have one person threatening the system, 24A—year—old system known as system, 2M-year-old system known as the system, 24A—year—old system known as the American experiment. We have one person who wants to take away polling stations, remove mail sorting machines, remove post office boxes, and the rhetoric coming from that person is a disaster for the United States. The president of the United States is suggesting he may or may not accept a peaceful transfer of power, and so I call on transfer of power, and so I all on all patriots in transfer of power, and so I call on all patriots in the United States to put aside their partisan ship and seek a higher order which is patriotism and look at that. When patriotism and look at that. when you compare patriotism and look at that. When you compare that person to the Vice President, he has his shortcomings, for sure, but I’m President, he has his shortcomings, forsure, but I’m reminded President, he has his shortcomings, for sure, but I’m reminded of what mayor Ed Koch once said on politics, mayor Ed Koch once said on politic, campaigning in mayor Ed Koch once said on politics, campaigning in 1978, he said if you like nine out of the 12 things I am saying you should vote for me but if you like 12 of them you need a psychiatrist. The point being there is no politician that is perfect in terms of the fingerprint of the voter and the politician. For me, I want that return to normalcy for the United States and for the world. So I have been a big supporter as a Republican alongside the Lincoln Project and others in the United States Vice President Project and others in the United States Vice PresidentJoe Biden. States Vice President joe Biden. Also, you States Vice PresidentJoe Biden. Also, you were a big supporter of Tmmp and his Also, you were a big supporter of Trump and his cheerleader and public Tmmp and his cheerleader and public voice, for the Trump and his cheerleader and public voice, for the first ten days I think, Anthony. It was 11! LAUGHTER 11, so sorry! You have MUGHTER 11, so sorry! You have been very critical of Donald Trump since then, critical of Donald Tmmp since then, but would critical of Donald Trump since then, but would it be fair to say if he hadn’t sacked you you would still be working for him now? I hadn’t sacked you you would still be working for him now? Ijust want to give everybody the timeline so they know. I started working for him in July know. I started working for him in july 2017, was know. I started working for him in July 2017, was fired abruptly 11 july 2017, was fired abruptly 11 days later July 2017, was fired abruptly 11 days later and I accept responsibility for that. I did something that deserve to be fired and I never blamed anybody. For two years I tried to stay loyal to the President and his agenda. You can President and his agenda. You ran see me on President and his agenda. You can see me on countless shows trying to advocate on behalf of Republican policies and what the president was doing, but he made it impossible. doing, but he made it impossibla. Separating doing, but he made it impossible. Separating women and children at the border, denouncing American intelligence agencies, calling the intelligence agencies, railing the press the intelligence agencies, calling the press the enemy of the people, if you are using racist, nativist drops against American congresswomen, it against American congressmmen, it just became against American congresswomen, it just became impossible. So he was just became impossibla. So he was moving the just became impossible. So he was moving the goalposts and I said, OK, I ran no longer moving the goalposts and I said, OK, I can no longer accept this sort of behaviour. That’s what happened. What I would say to you, the facts what I would say to you, the facts are changing, What I would say to you, the facts are changing, then you change your opinion. My liberal are changing, then you change your opinion. My liberalfriends are changing, then you change your opinion. My liberal friends would say, you know, he is the same guy he was in 2015, so he is doing the exact same thing is here in 2020, so why did you change? You must be a better employee. Well, I wouldn’t better employee. Well, Iwouldn’t have better employee. Well, I wouldn’t have supported him for two years if I was a bitter employee that make a bitter employee. I say he might not hither employee. I say he might not have changed, bitter employee. I say he might not have changed, but I have changed. I have become way more psychologically have become my more psychologically minded have become way more psychologically minded and empathetic to what is exactly going on and what the struggle is now for working—class families in the US. I grew up in a working-class families in the US. I grew up in a working—class family. But it was an working-class family. But it was an aspirational working—class family. But it was an aspirational working—class family aspirational working-class family where aspirational working—class family where we were in the middle class. of where we were in the middle class. Of those families feel today economically desperate. I thought Mr Tmmp would economically desperate. I thought Mr Trump would represent them in Tmmp would represent them in Washington Trump would represent them in Washington but it turns out he was really just Washington but it turns out he was reallyjust representing himself. Bonnie? I want to go back to the question, with respect, to the questioner. We use a term like least worst. What are we selecting? worst. what are we selecting? Pims? worst. What are we selecting? Pizzas? This is the problem. We Pims? This is the problem. We don’t Pizzas? This is the problem. We don’t talk about leadership. What don’t talk about leadership. what does don’t talk about leadership. What does least worst mean? What do we does least worst mean? what do we want in a does least worst mean? What do we want in a leader? We have a leader here who we got off the television, basically. America, he is off the television too. Is that what we are telavision too. Is that what we are about? television too. Is that what we are about? We need to check ourselves, and our leader is us. If we think the leader is somewhere up in the stratosphere, we are going to get what we deserved. I don’t know what least worst is. I have lived through a lot of presidents and I know what a leader is and we need to talk about leadership. That is one of the problems with the Labour Party and problams with the labour Party and the problems with the Labour Party and the Conservative Party. It is a leadership issue. Anthony, let me say something to you. Firstly, let me give you your respect. The last two years you have been incredible in terms of coming clean on TV in front of peopla. in terms of coming clean on TV in front of people. You published a front of peopla. You published a book. front of people. You published a book. You’re a behind the incredible Lincoln project of conservatives and republicans who actually tried to save it, conservatism, and make it decent again. but the other thing you did, because of your charisma and intelligence, you normalised Donald Trump, and that is the Donald Tmmp, and that is the problem. I’m Donald Trump, and that is the problem. I’m not saying it’s Donald Trump, and that is the problem. I’m not saying it’sjust problem. I’m not saying it’s just you. I’m talking problem. I’m not saying it’sjust you. I’m talking about all of you are very intelligent people in the beginning, who flocked around this beginning, who ﬂocked around this man beginning, who flocked around this man because of your political beliefs. Donald Trump was out of beliefs. Donald Tmmp was out of order for beliefs. Donald Trump was out of order for 30 years. beliefs. Donald Trump was out of orderfor 30 years. It beliefs. Donald Trump was out of orderfor 30 years. Itjust beliefs. Donald Trump was out of order for 30 years. Itjust didn’t order for 30 years. It just didn’t happen. We order for 30 years. Itjust didn’t happen. We are now having to deal with talking about least worst, as if we were talking about choosing a television host instead of leader of the free world. This is horrible, the free world. This is horribla, horrible the free world. This is horrible, horrible political position for us to be in. I horrible political position for us to be in. Ijust wanted to say that to you. And, again, thank you guys for what you’re doing on the right for helping to get for what you’re doing on the right for helping to getjo elected, but for helping to get jo elected, but it is a for helping to getjo elected, but it is a terrible, horrible mess. The it is a terribla, horrible mess. The norms of it is a terrible, horrible mess. The norms of the United States are in trouble -- trying norms of the United States are in trouble —— trying to get norms of the United States are in trouble —— trying to getJoe elected. The norms of this country are in trouble, and norms are what make civilisation. That is what we have to go back to at the inauguration. Anthony? Can I respond? Just Anthony? (“an I respond? just quickly. I Anthony? Can I respond? Just quickly. I respect what you are saying, but quickly. I respect what you are saying, butl quickly. I respect what you are saying, but I would also say to you that as a lesson I have tried to own that as a lasson I have tried to own that in the that as a lesson I have tried to own that in the public domain. I know you have. Many of my Republican friends, who I would say our mainstream Republicans were doing the same thing. It does not take away from me at all, if anything it makes me accountable for my decision makes me accountabla for my decision making, I have to makes me accountable for my decision making, I have to live with it for the rest of my life. Having said that, being willing to admit it and trying to break away and trying to do something for other people is do something for other peopla is what I do something for other people is what I have been trying to do. That is why I gave you my respect at the beginning. I is why I gave you my respect at the beginning. Iwant is why I gave you my respect at the beginning. I want everybody to know who is watching the show you have to be very careful about your decision making because you can get your making because you ran get your pride and ego making because you can get your pride and ego involved in your decision—making and then your emotions decision-making and then your emotions go decision—making and then your emotions go up and your intelligence goes down. For me I had a self narrative that was ego —based, I had narrative that was ego -based, I had some narrative that was ego —based, I had some measure of financial success in some measure offinancial success in the some measure of financial success in the United States and I wanted to work in the White House. I was work in the white House. I was normalising work in the White House. I was normalising the president because of the success story of Eisenhower and Abraham Lincoln, I the success story of Eisenhower and Abraham Lincoln, Ithought the success story of Eisenhower and Abraham Lincoln, I thought he could not be this crazy. , where he was. I am telling that as a cautionary tale am telling that as a cautionary talc for am telling that as a cautionary tale for others. am telling that as a cautionary talc for others. Try am telling that as a cautionary tale for others. Try to put your pride and ego aside when you are making decisions that are political or relationship based on in your business. Paula? I hear relationship based on in your business. Paula? I hearwhat relationship based on in your business. Paula? I hear what Anthony is saying and it seems that some Republicans are getting by’s remorse and Republicans are getting by’s remorse and regretting that Donald Trump is and regretting that Donald Tmmp is their and regretting that Donald Trump is their representative in the presidential race. But they have had opportunities through impeachment and others to remove him, why didn’t they take them? Did they put wanting to hold onto power ahead of what was good for the country? Yes. David? (“an I ask good for the country? Yes. David? Can I ask all the panel if what they (“an I ask all the panel if what they think will Can I ask all the panel if what they think will happen in the United States if Donald Trump is re—elected, will they remain united? re-elected, will they remain united? We will re—elected, will they remain united? We will come to that in a minute. Looking after number one, but unfortunately it might be closer than you think next week. Marie, the question from Helen what should question from Helan what should peopla in question from Helen what should people in the UK be concerned? And yet Donald Trump is steadily behind yet Donald Tmmp is steadily behind in the polls, yet Donald Trump is steadily behind in the polls, but who knows what could happen? Are you concerned? I definitely think I am concerned because whatever happens in the US is going to impact right around the world. In terms of the is going to impact right around the world. In terms of theJewish world. In terms of the jewish community a world. In terms of theJewish community a recent poll from the American community a recent poll from the Americanjewish community a recent poll from the AmericanJewish Committee said that American jewish Committee said that 75% of American jewish Committee said that 7596 of jewish Americanjewish Committee said that 75% ofJewish people would vote Democrat. Certainly Donald Trump has Democrat. Certainly Donald Tmmp has been a very Democrat. Certainly Donald Trump has been a very divisive figure and personally for me he has not disavowed himself of his associations with the right wing or white supremacists. But in terms of foreign policy he has done some good things. In the Middle East, for example, he has helped normalise relations with Israel and Dubai and other countries. With the UAE and other countries. with the UAE and Bahrain. other countries. With the UAE and Bahrain. And of course we have got Brexit which has not yet been mentioned on this programme. That is unusual. Absolutely, and the UK has a strong relationship with the US, a special relationship, and I will be very concerned if special relationship, and I will be very concerned ifJoe Biden was the very concerned if joe Biden was the president and very concerned ifJoe Biden was the president and will that relationship tarry on. president and will that relationship carry on. Would you rather it was Donald Trump? I want somebody with the right values, values are what matter to me and I want to see the person who has got those values and is going to be a leader. We have seen what happened with the Labour seen what happened with the labour Party in this seen what happened with the Labour Party in this country. Of the two which one? It is very difficult. I am not a US citizen, but I am am nota US citizen, but I am looking for am not a US citizen, but I am looking for values and historically the jewish looking for values and historically theJewish community, 75% of them, the jewish community, 7596 of them, would usually theJewish community, 75% of them, would usually be voting Democrats. But I am very worried at the outcome whatever happens. How can you make whatever happens. How ran you make peace with two whatever happens. How can you make peace with two countries that Israel is not even at war with? Two, leaving the Palestinians out of anything, anything, they were not even at the table. You are talking about the deal that Donald Trump has about the deal that Donald Tmmp has proposed? about the deal that Donald Trump has proposed? That was a peace deal and that is the corn that Donald Trump that is the corn that Donald Tmmp lays down. The that is the corn that Donald Trump lays down. The first racist demonstration after Donald Trump demonstration after Donald Tmmp became demonstration after Donald Trump became president was in Charlottesville. A Jewish became president was in Charlottesville. AJewish girl was Charlothesvilla. A jewish girt was killed. Charlottesville. AJewish girl was killed. This was guys walking down the street looking like something out of the Nuremberg rallies saying jews will not out of the Nuremberg rallies saying Jews will not replace us. I do not jews will not replace us. I do not get it. I really do Jews will not replace us. I do not get it. I really do not get it how anybody ran get it. I really do not get it how anybody can talk about backing this anybody ran talk about backing this man anybody can talk about backing this man with that kind of thing. It is a total con. To leave the Palestinians out of this is another part of the problem. While I have said in problem. whila I have said in fairness problem. While I have said in fairness to him in terms of foreign policy, the normalisation of relationships is important. That is what I was talking about when I was talking about trauma. I am talking about the 360 degrees of this. How ran you look at about the 360 degrees of this. How can you look at that? Joe Biden came ran you look at that? joe Biden came into the can you look at that? Joe Biden came into the presidency because of Charlottesville. That literally was Charlothesvilla. That literally was all Charlottesville. That literally was all white guys walking down... You saw it. Explain it to me. I agree saw it. Explain itto me. Iagree that saw it. Explain it to me. I agree that Donald Trump is very divisive. that Donald Tmmp is very divisive. Explain that to that Donald Trump is very divisive. Explain that to me, please. I am asking you because I do not understand how a Jewish person can understand how a jewish person ran say, OK he understand how a Jewish person can say, OK he made peace over there, but yet the anti—Semitism tropes are but yet the anti-Semitism tropes are gaining a hold but yet the anti—Semitism tropes are gaining a hold in this country. I don’t get it. Explain to me. I gaining a hold in this country. I don’t get it. Explain to me. Ijust want to confirm to you that where there have been policies like the travel ban to Muslim countries, the Board of Deputies has criticised Donald Trump, we do not hesitate to Donald Tmmp, we do not hesitate to criticise Donald Trump, we do not hesitate to criticise his policies. How do you feel? Let me bring neck in. Riveting though that is. I must bring the rest of the panel in. Nick. I presume you are supporting Joe presume you are supporting joe Biden, presume you are supporting Joe Biden, obviously. Should we be concerned here that we are looking at the two least worst candidate, as Helan says? It at the two least worst candidate, as Helen says? It is a decision for the Helan says? It is a decision for the American Helen says? It is a decision for the American people between the two candidates. It would not come as a surprise to see if I was in America I would be supporting the Democrats. Obviously I share the concerns about divisive language. Of course I absolutely do and I have spoken out in the past around things like the travel ban. But at the same time we have to recognise this election will have to recognise this elaction will take have to recognise this election will take place next week, it is a decision for the American people, decision for the American peopla, and our decision for the American people, and our relationship with America is not related to one president or one era, it goes back over generations. There are cultural, political, economic ties and there are huge challenges around the world, the coronavirus crisis, and climate change to name two of them. We have to work with the winner of this presidential election and at the same time be a critical friend to America and told the president to account and be critical where necessary. That is the approach a labour necessary. That is the approach a Labour government would take to the labour government would take to the winner of Labour government would take to the winner of this presidential election. It will be tricky for the government if election. It will be tricky for the government ifJoe Biden gets in. He government if joe Biden gets in. He has had government ifJoe Biden gets in. He has had some strong things to say about the internal market will, as has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. Joe has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. joe Biden says has Nancy Pelosi in Congress. Joe Biden says he respects the result of the referendum on Brexit. That is not what I am referring to. You know what he said. I am on broadly the same page as Nick. I will respect and trust the same page as Nick. I will respect and trust thejudgment same page as Nick. I will respect and trust the judgment of the American people. Any trade deal between the US and the UK must be contingent on the respect of the Good Friday Agreement. We plan to respect the Good Friday Agreement. He is concerned you will not. My point is are you concerned that if joe Biden wins point is are you concerned that if Joe Biden wins the relationship between the British Government and America might be less warm? No I am America might be lass warm? No I am not for two America might be less warm? No I am not for two reasons. We have been bending over backwards to respect the Good Friday Agreement for the last few years since the Brexit vote happen. To make a general point, the Conservatives in government have worked closely with Republican presidents like Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan and Democrat presidents like reasonable, Clinton presidents like reasonabla, (linton and presidents like reasonable, Clinton and Barack Obama and Labour in and Barack Obama and labour in office and Barack Obama and Labour in office have done the same. Whoever office have done the same. whoever occupies the office have done the same. Whoever occupies the White House, as our occupies the white House, as our closest occupies the White House, as our closest and long—standing ally, we closest and long-standing ally, we will always closest and long—standing ally, we will always work closely and cooperatively with America whoever occupies that office. I trust the American people to make their own decision. Did you ever vote, Bonnie, in the American election? Of course in the American elaction? Of course I did. And in the American election? Of course I did. And here as well. Briefly. I did. And here as well. Brieﬂy. Nancy Pelosi, I did. And here as well. Briefly. Nancy Pelosi, leader of the house, and she will be on Tuesday, she ratifies the deal. I hope you guys are right that you are not disturbing the Good Friday Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He Agreement. joe Biden is Irish. He will not Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He will not let Agreement. joe Biden is Irish. He will not let you Agreement. Joe Biden is Irish. He will not let you get away with that. Let’s take another question, I rannot Let’s take another question, I cannot believe we have come so late in the programme to this because it has been first in the programme for months. Yes, good evening, Fiona. Good evening, panel. A recent study from Imperial Forecasting suggests that Covid—19 deaths in wave 2 could far exceed those in wave 1. Given that France, Germany and UK devolved administrations are either in or have announced a total lockdown, why is the UK government so reluctant to follow suit? Nick. I Nick. lam Nick. I am speaking to you from Walas Nick. I am speaking to you from Wales this evening and I am not in the studio because we are in day six of our the studio because we are in day six of ourfirebreak, our 17 the studio because we are in day six of our firebreak, our 17 day firebreak here in Wales. That action firebreak here in Walas. That action is firebreak here in Wales. That action is being taken here in Wales to try to get on top of the virus. I think to get on top of the vims. I think that is the to get on top of the virus. I think that is the appropriate thing to do. I think if we look at the situation in England, I think we are at a critical moment. Keir Starmer argued for a circuit breaker of two to three weeks. I do understand that time is passing, of course it is, but I think... Action is required. It is absolutely clear that what we have to do now is to make sure that we not only have that circuit breaker, but also that time is used to get on top of test, trace and isolate. Nick, I to get on top of test, trace and isolate. Nick, lam going to get on top of test, trace and isolate. Nick, I am going to to get on top of test, trace and isolate. Nick, I am going tojump isolate. Nick, lam going tojump in. Nick, I isolate. Nick, lam going tojump in. Nick, lam isolate. Nick, I am going tojump in. Nick, I am sorry, isolate. Nick, I am going tojump in. Nick, lam sorry, not isolate. Nick, I am going tojump in. Nick, I am sorry, not only are you in a circuit breaker, it looks like your computer is having a bit of a circuit breakdown as well. We ran hear you, of a circuit breakdown as well. We can hear you, but we cannot see you. ran hear you, but we cannot see you. I will come can hear you, but we cannot see you. I will come back to you as soon as we get that reinstated. Chris, coming back to the question. You have got France and Germany and the devolved administrations in Lough dens. Germany is going to look down and it has got half as many new rases as and it has got half as many new cases as us and a fraction of the rases as us and a fraction of the number of cases as us and a fraction of the number of deaths every day, surely it is a matter of time? Each country is different and we need to carefully balance the right approach for our country. I know you are not going to come on and say definitely yes there is a lockdown, but anyone looking at the graphs must be thinking it is looking at the graphs must be thinking it isjust looking at the graphs must be thinking it is just a looking at the graphs must be thinking it isjust a matter of thinking it is just a matter of time. thinking it isjust a matter of time. We have really different circumstances in different regions of the country. The East of England only has one quarter of the cases that the North West has. Cases are rising everywhere. The World Health Organization and the Deputy Chief Medical Officer says regional makes sense. We have to balance it with children’s education, mental health, people seeking cancer treatment, jobs, we have to balance those considerations against the health consideration and get it right. Things are working differently in different parts of the country, that is why this careful and well calibrated balance and balance approach has been taken. That will be kept under review and if the facts change, different decisions might be taken in the future. I am listening to you go through that and I have got no crystal ball and I have got no medical knowledge, but have got no medical knowladge, but watching the have got no medical knowledge, but watching the graphs, cases are watching the graphs, rases are increasing watching the graphs, cases are increasing everywhere, are you going to end up coming back here in two or three weeks and saying, we have seen the facts and we are going into a lockdown? I do not have a crystal ball and it would be rash to make predictions about the future. But to date looking at the regional differences, looking at the costs of a lockdown would impose on health, mental health, children’s education, jobs and so on, the balance being stmck is jobs and so on, the balance being struck is the right one. The World stmck is the right one. The World Health struck is the right one. The World Health Organization agree with that and it is kept under review the whole time, which is a sensible thing to do. Donna, you are shaking your head and I know that you have been shielding with your husband for eight months now. Eight months, yeah. I’d just like to come back to that point, so me and my husband have been shielding since the 23rd of March. Just to give a brief idea, my husband partway through this went on to kidney dialysis, so my question really is, the shielding group, the 2.2 million people at the end of March that got these letters who were petrified to go out of their homes, and we couldn’t even go to our gardens, now the cases are going absolutely through the roof — where is the common sense? And I know obviously there are treatments, but can Ijust highlight there are thousands of people waiting for organ donations across this country, and, as I said to Fiona earlier, the plight of my husband and many others in the same situation is being put on a list to be taken off a list, to be put back on a list? Now, my fear is we are going to get back to routine operations, transplantation, getting stopped. It’s already happening in Leeds, in Nottingham, and you talk about the tier system. I live in West Lindsey, where at the moment it is relatively low, in Tier 1, however literally ii to the two miles to the side of me is Nottinghamshire, who have gone into Tier 3 from Friday, and also bordering is South Yorkshire, and from I think Saturday we now have North Lincolnshire and East Hull, so with all due respect it’s a matter of time before... So surely we should jump on this bandwagon now before it gets any worse? Carl, you have your hand up, and I know you’re working as a contact tracer at the moment, so you have a very particular view of this. What is your response? Yeah, lam. Well, I think we’ve already proved lockdowns don’t work. We tried it before. All it’s doing is kicking the can down the road. As soon as you let people out again, people are back to square one, being exposed to the virus. So what you think answer is? Well, I think we should start looking at different models, like Sweden, for example. Sweden tried a completely different approach to anywhere else pretty much in Europe and they have had no massive rise in cases any different to anywhere else in Europe. They didn’t lockdown. They just enforced the social distancing. Bars stayed open, pubs stayed open, schools stayed open. Sweden’s in trouble. And people carried on pretty much as normal. Imean... There were quite a few restrictions in Sweden. Yeah, Sweden’s in trouble. They tried herd immunity. That’s what you’re talking about. And Sweden got in some trouble with that. I think one of the things, and the lady who spoke, I commiserate with her — I’ve been separated from my husband since February, we can’t be together. It... The same thing in the United States. We don’t have any leadership, we don’t have a leader. This isn’t some kind of thing you put on a graph and stand up, behind a podium, and talk to people holding up graphs and charts. The only truth here is Covid. Covid is the truth. And then you move from there, and we work to unite the country. We’re all in this together. We’re in this together. We’re not tiers in all of this. We are together. So we need a leader who can talk to us together, and the United States of America has 51 solutions running around there because the leadership refuses to take responsibility. We need a leader here. Anthony? Well, I mean, I agree once again. I think the biggest problem, again, thinking about whatJoe Biden was saying, he wants to shutdown the virus and not necessarily the economy. If you just went through the protocol and standards of South Korea, who had experience with MERS and SARS, and wejust copy their best practices, we would be well on our way, whether it’s the United Kingdom or the United States. I willjust point out, South Korea, 20 deaths per million, on a per capita basis. The United States, 620 deaths per million. And I know the United Kingdom is suffering alongside the United States. Soto me it is very simple. all We have a tendency for myopia, to think our Anglo—Saxon way —— We have a tendency for myopia, to think our Anglo—Saxon way of doing things is a priori, but I think we should be copying the South Koreans right now, and adopting their practices and then you will see both of our economies flourish. tier tierfrom your personal tier from your personal knowledge of tier from your personal knowladge of Donald Tmmp, tier from your personal knowledge of Donald Trump, what is driving his Donald Tmmp, what is driving his reaction Donald Trump, what is driving his reaction to coronavirus? Is it purely electioneering or something purely elactioneering or something more? purely electioneering or something more? Its personality. He is the most insecure person you could ever meet in your life, Fiona. He is contrary... People telling him what to do in front of him, he will do the opposite. Anthony Gauci, he will do the opposite. He is insecure about having expert to make him feel inferior and so he is classically mishandling things. I think that is one of the more startling things about him, when you think about his ascendancy to the American presidency, but he is not somebody who ran presidency, but he is not somebody who can handle conversations with who ran handle conversations with experts. He who can handle conversations with experts. He wants to run the American presidency as a one—man American presidency as a one-man West End American presidency as a one—man West End or Broadway play. It is nonsensical. So there is great frustration in the US. He has fmstration in the US. He has politicised frustration in the US. He has politicised the science, lied to people about the science, and right now as we are speaking he is flying now as we are speaking he is ﬂying round now as we are speaking he is flying round the battle ground states creating super spreader events. Who creating super spreader events. who does creating super spreader events. Who does this? You’re talking about leadership. One of the things both countries need right now is direct point of honesty, and stop shading things, stop spinning things, just say "Here are the facts, this is what we have to do is a country. We want to make ourselves less sick. " want to make ourselves less sick. ' the president of want to make ourselves less sick. " the president of the United States has made our country sicker, weaker and poorer, and I can’t speak has made our country sicker, weaker and poorer, and I can’t speakfor and poorer, and I can’t speak for Britain and poorer, and I can’t speakfor Britain because you guys know that politics better than me, but we have politic better than me, but we have to cut it politics better than me, but we have to cut it out. That’s it. Bringing you back to Paul’s question, Maria, why is the UK governments are reluctant to follow suit of places like France and Germany going into various permutations of the lockdown? We have to remember some of the countries who did really well first time around are also taking emergency measures now and are in lockdown. Here in the UK the emergency measures now and are in lockdown. Here in the UK theJewish lockdown. Here in the UK the jewish community lockdown. Here in the UK theJewish community have suffered heavily with death, as have many people from death, as have many peopla from ethnic death, as have many people from ethnic minorities. I want to commend the report of Doreen Lawrence, and I know there has been the Public Health England report as well from the Government. I think what has to be sensible here is a pragmatic approach, an integrated approach. We are seeing [oral approach, an integrated approach. We are seeing local lockdowns. We may are seeing [oral lockdowns. We may have to are seeing local lockdowns. We may have to see national lockdowns here, but what we need is effective quick testing and we need the track and trace up and working. We don’t want it to be overwhelmed. But, yes, it does need leadership, but I can’t say I am in favour of the Swedish model because... Its not working. It’s obvious. The figures seem really large in America but you have to remember the population is so much bigger. But we are of course horrified at seeing these super spreader events. 50 there is no easy spreader events. So there is no easy answer. It’s spreader events. 50 there is no easy answer. It’s the only time I can answer. It’s the only time I ran remember answer. It’s the only time I can remember in my lifetime, though, where the whole world is cooperating where the whola world is cooperating on a where the whole world is cooperating on a vaccine at least, but even that is not going to solve the problem. But what’s the answer? I can’t give you that. Like Mike Billy, you are a doctor and you speak to your colleagues on the front line. What colleagues on the front line. what is the colleagues on the front line. What is the answer? What is your view? —— is the answer? what is your view? -- well, Billy, you’re a is the answer? What is your view? —— well, Billy, you’re a doctor. I’m afraid there is not an easy solution to the current problem, and to the current problam, and certainly to the current problem, and certainly adopting the Swedish model would adversely affect the health and well—being of many NHS and and well-being of many NHS and health and well—being of many NHS and health and social care staff. Also I health and social rare staff. Also I don’t health and social care staff. Also I don’t think the test and trace system is a solution at this point in time either. The system is most effective in the early stages of a effective in the earty stages of a pandemic. effective in the early stages of a pandemic. As case numbers rise, we pandemic. As rase numbers rise, we need to pandemic. As case numbers rise, we need to become less reliant on the test and trace system and more reliant on social distancing and impact of lockdown measures. The problem is the rate of infection rises beyond the capacity of the test and trace system quite quickly. But, Nick, test and trace system quite quickly. Butt, Nick, can test and trace system quite quickly. Butt, Nick, canl test and trace system quite quickly. Butt, Nick, can I let you come back Butt, Nick, ran I let you come back in, because we Butt, Nick, can I let you come back in, because we lost you for a bit before you managed to finish your point -- But, before you managed to finish your point —— But, Nick. Thank you. Not point -- But, Nick. Thank you. Not sure what point —— But, Nick. Thank you. Not sure what happened there, but Chris mentions the threat to the economy and the biggest threat to the economy is a virus we are not on top of and is out of control. To economy is a virus we are not on top of and is out of control. To get it under control the obviously need the testing system but we need the tracing system, and to have an effective tracing system you need to be tracing over 80% of contacts. be tracing over 8096 of contacts. Here in be tracing over 80% of contacts. Here in Wales with an 80% system we Here in Walas with an 8096 system we are over Here in Wales with an 80% system we are over that figure but unfortunately it is not the case in unfortunately it is not the use in England and unfortunately it is not the case in England and the reason we are arguing for that circuit breaker in England is to give that opportunity to get that system to work. But also, too, to be clear, we are not suggesting in that scenario also, too, to be clear, we are not suggesting in that scenario schools should close. We should all be trying to keep schools open because we know the damage it does to educational attainment for children being out of school. But the reality is we are in the situation in England where the Government has lost control of the virus and time is slipping away for them to actually take this measure of getting a circuit breaker in place to try to get back in control and back on top of testing. But to try to get back in control and back on top of testing. Butjust back on top of testing. But just before you back on top of testing. Butjust before you we heard Billy saying once you get to a certain level of numbers of cases test and trace becomes less effective and easily becomes overwhelmed, and in Wales where there is a greater success with that nonetheless cases are with that nonetheless rases are going up? Well, yes, cases are on going up? Well, yes, rases are on the rise, and that is why Well, yes, cases are on the rise, and that is why we have taken the measure we have. That measure came into place last Friday. It will be for 17 days and obviously then, as we come out of it, we will see what the impact of that has been. But I think taking the diligent, cautious approach that has defined the approach to the virus with the leadership of Mark Drakeford here in Wales has been the “Y Drakeford here in Wales has been the way to approach it, and the reality is with the tiered system in England I’m afraid it’s is with the tiered system in England I’m afraid it’sjust is with the tiered system in England I’m afraid it’s just not the case I’m afraid it’s just not the rase that I’m afraid it’s just not the case that areas are permanently coming out of the restrictions or the tiers. These figures are very sadly going in one direction, and I want to see the Government in England getting on top of the virus in the “Y getting on top of the virus in the way we are attempting to do so in Walas. way we are attempting to do so in Wales. You ask the question. Do you Walas. You ask the question. Do you want Wales. You ask the question. Do you want the last word, Paul? Thank you, yes. I want the last word, Paul? Thank you, yes. Ilost want the last word, Paul? Thank you, yes. I lost my father and my wife both to long—standing health issues both to long-standing health issues in 2019. both to long—standing health issues in 2019. I’m so sorry. I actually feel fortunate that they died last year, because we were able to give them dignified and fitting funerals. The families of almost 16,000 The families of almost 46,000 victims, The families of almost 16,000 victims, and you are broadcasting from Lincoln, that is half the population of Lincoln. Go onto Lincoln high Street whenever and every other person you see, that is the level of people who have died. Anything, a the level of people who have died. Anything, 3 second national lockdown, it only risks 3 similar lockdown, it only risks a similar number lockdown, it only risks 3 similar number of families suffering this heartache... You cannot be at your loved one’s bedside when they have their last breath, you can’t even give them a fitting and dignified sendoff. It is appalling and it needs to happen now. Tonight, from half past ten, half past ten. Not three weeks in the future. It needs to happen now. You have made your point, Paul, and I’m so sorry for your loss last year. Thank you very much for that. Chris, your loss last year. Thank you very much forthat. Chris, I your loss last year. Thank you very much for that. Chris, I think you want to come back in. I’m afraid our hour is up. The questions came from Lincoln. Thank you all for making your points, and sorry we couldn’t get you all in. Next week our audience comes from Lewisham and on the panel we have the Hollywood actor Rose McGowan, the former Brexit secretary David Davis, and the mathematician and TV presenter Hannah Fry, whether Mac quite a programme. The following week our questions come from Dover and among others we will be joined by the former speaker of the house, John former speaker of the house, john Burkle. former speaker of the house, John Burkle. Do former speaker of the house, john Burkle. Do get former speaker of the house, John Burkle. Do get in touch if you want Burkla. Do get in touch if you want to be on Burkle. Do get in touch if you want to be on either of those and live in those areas. —— the former speaker those areas. -- the former speaker of the house, john those areas. —— the former speaker of the house, John Bercow. You will of the house, john Bercow. You will have a of the house, John Bercow. You will have a chance to carry on the conversation and you can see on the conversation and you ran see on the screen how conversation and you can see on the screen how to join conversation and you can see on the screen how tojoin in. And Bonnie says, thank you, Lincoln Project. And the people of Lincoln! Thank you And the peopla of Lincoln! Thank you very much to And the people of Lincoln! Thank you very much to the people of Lincoln very much to the peopla of Lincoln for joining and very much to the people of Lincoln forjoining and thank you for for joining and thank you for joining us forjoining and thank you for joining us down the line. Great to have you all on Question Time. Goodbye.