Welcome to Question Time. On tonight’s panel, Robert Buckland, the Government’s tonight’s panel, Robert Buckland, the Government’sjustice Secretary. the Government’s justice Secretary. Before the Government’sjustice Secretary. Before that, prison officer. Labour Before that, prison officer. labour Shadow Before that, prison officer. Labour Shadow Schools Minister and one—time Shadow Schools Minister and one-time president of Shadow Schools Minister and one—time president of the National Union of Students, Wes Streeting. Joining us Students, Wes Streeting. joining us down Students, Wes Streeting. Joining us down the line, former Prime Minister of Australia between 2015—18 and of Australia between 2015-18 and twice of Australia between 2015—18 and twice leader of the Liberal party in Australia, Malcolm Turnbull. And Anand Menon, professor of politics Anand Menon, professor of politic at King’s Anand Menon, professor of politics at King’s College London and talk radio host and journalist at King’s College London and talk radio host and journalistJulia radio host and journalist Julia Hartley—Brewer. radio host and journalistJulia Hartley—Brewer. APPLAUSE Good evening, welcome to my guests in the studio and to Michael temple joining us down the line. Bright and earty in the joining us down the line. Bright and early in the morning in Australia. earty in the morning in Australia. Thank you very early in the morning in Australia. Thank you very much. Our live audience is with us again via video link. This time you are from Chelmsford, very good to see you there. Thank you for Chelmsford, very good to see you there. Thank you forjoining in the there. Thank you for joining in the programme and there. Thank you forjoining in the programme and watching us. You can programme and watching us. You ran join in the programme and watching us. You can join in the conversation in the usual way, as you know how, on social media. Let’s hear what you have to say about tonight’s discussion. Our have to say about tonight’s discussion. Ourfirst question discussion. Our first question tonight is discussion. Ourfirst question tonight is from Steve Lester. Good evening everyone, good evening panel. I would like to ask, it is the final orders at the last chance saloon regarding Brexit. The countrrs saloon regarding Brexit. The country’s economy is on its knees countrrs economy is on its knees and regardless country’s economy is on its knees and regardless of whether you are being a remainder or a Leaver, we are all suffering from a lack of closure due to the stubborn egos on all sides. Where and how is it going all sides. where and how is it going to all all sides. Where and how is it going to all end? Well, that is the $64,000 question, Robert? I to all end? Well, that is the $64,000 question, Robert? Iwant to all end? Well, that is the $64,000 question, Robert? I want it $64,000 question, Robert? Iwant it to end in a $64,000 question, Robert? I want it to end in a deal. I think we are now very much at the end game. It looks like the end of the weekend when both things will be decided one way or the other. We have been very dear or the other. We have been very clear that we are not asking for the earth, we are not even asking for a bespoke deal. We want something akin to the relationship the EU enjoys with Canada, very straightforward, free trade agreement which allows two sovereign state, in Britain, and a sovereign bloke to work together. -- sovereign a sovereign bloke to work together. —— sovereign block. I have a deal -- sovereign block. I have a deal ran be done. —— sovereign block. I have a deal can be done. The Prime Minister is ran be done. The Prime Minister is sounding very can be done. The Prime Minister is sounding very pessimistic about it, isn’t he? He is being very firm and direct about what we cannot accept. The idea that somehow there can be a The idea that somehow there ran be a continuing legal The idea that somehow there can be a continuing legal link of the type that was in the end rejected, not just in a referendum but in a succession of referendums is only stating the truth. Throughout this we have been extremely direct about it. We had said that is not acceptable, we cannot have a future acceptable, we rannot have a future relationship acceptable, we cannot have a future relationship that means if we do something as a sovereign state, then Europe ran something as a sovereign state, then Europe can impose tariffss or other Europe ran impose tariffss or other penalties Europe can impose tariffss or other penalties upon us. That doesn’t seem to me to be consistent with a future free trade agreement would like the ones we see across the world. What ones we see across the world. what about this ones we see across the world. What about this contingency deal, if you like, that the EU suggested today? That if we don’t manage to strike a deal and the Prime Minister is sounding very pessimistic this evening, there will be contingency plan so planes can keep flying and plan so planes ran keep ﬂying and freight ran plan so planes can keep flying and freight can keep going between the freight ran keep going between the countries, freight can keep going between the countries, is the Government likely to accept that deal? We have been preparing throughout for a change that would come in any event at the end of the year, with or without a deal, there would be changes. Is it likely to accept what the EU is offering, the easing of movement between the EU and the UK while Ideal tries to get thrashed out? We will do everything to advance the interests of the citizens that we serve. Clearly, it is an everybody’s serve. Clearty, it is an everybode interests serve. Clearly, it is an everybody’s interests to avoid the logistical difficulties... Is that a yes or no? I’m concentrating on the current negotiation. I think it is right for us to do that and really push it to the end. The Prime Minister is straining every sinew to get this sorted out. That has been our position throughout. It’s very dear, very position throughout. It’s very clear, very straightforward. I hope dear, very straightforward. I hope that my clear, very straightforward. I hope that my friends in Europe are listening and they will act in a way that means we can reach that that means we ran reach that agreement. that means we can reach that agreement. Also listening is Malcolm Turnbull, a former Prime Minister of Australia. The Prime Minister here has said tonight get ready for an Australia style deal if we don’t manage to sort out a trade deal with the EU. Should the UK be happy with that, in your opinion? Well, it will be pretty disappointing, I think. We have a deal with the EU on WTO terms and there are really some very large barriers to Australian trade with Europe, which we are seeking to address as we negotiate a free—trade address as we negotiate a free-trade agreement address as we negotiate a free—trade agreement with Europe. But Australians would not regard our trade relationship with Europe as being a satisfactory one. I mean, they are rather third biggest trading partner I guess because it is such a big economy but there are very big barriers to Australian exports, of agricultural products in particular. There are a lot of frictions in the system, in terms of services. There is a lot to aim for. when I was services. There is a lot to aim for. When I was Prime Minister, we when I was Prime Minister, we started When I was Prime Minister, we started formal negotiations over European- started formal negotiations over European— Australian free trade European- Australian free trade agreement European— Australian free trade agreement but that will take some time. Be careful what you wish for. Australia’s relationship with the EU is not one, from a trade point of view, that Britain, I think, is not one, from a trade point of view, that Britain, Ithink, would want. Frankly. Julia? With all due want. Frankly. julia? with all due respect, Mr want. Frankly. Julia? With all due respect, Mr Turnbull referred to Brexit as a catastrophe after he left office, that’s not what I think it is. Where we end up with a Deal it is. where we end up with a Deal or no Deal? it is. Where we end up with a Deal or no Deal? I genuinely think anyone who thinks they know right now, including Michel Barnier and Lauder including Michel Barnier and lauder Frost, the including Michel Barnier and Lauder Frost, the two negotiators, I think they would be lying, we don’t know. If this is the last... Waiting for the other side to blink moment or the inevitable drama you would get at the end of any sort of trade deal going right at the 11th hour, the last second of the 11th hour, who knows? I think the crucial thing to remember here is why people voted Brexit. I’m pretty sure, as is always the case when I’m on the always the rase when I’m on the show, I always the rase when I’m on the show, lam always the case when I’m on the show, I am the only person here who voted for Brexit. I voted for Brexit not because, I wonder what the tariff will be on oranges or milk or W tars coming tariff will be on oranges or milk or VW cars coming into the country? I WI tars coming into the country? I voted for VW cars coming into the country? I voted for Brexit because I want the people in charge of my country to be peoplc in charge of my country to be democratically people in charge of my country to be democratically accountable to me and everybody else here. Because I believe we are proud nation an independent state and I don’t want others to have a say over how we run others to have a say over how we mn our others to have a say over how we run our business. Once we have that principle, which is why most people principle, which is why most peopla voted for principle, which is why most people voted for Brexit, then they difficulties ahead of getting a Brexit deal, given what the EU are offering, become very clear and very difficult to surmount. If the EU is basically saying they want to play a game of Simon says, which is the EU 5575 game of Simon says, which is the EU says whatever we do, you have to follow, here are the rules we have follow, here are the mles we have and the follow, here are the rules we have and the regulations we have and if we change them in the future, you have to change them we will punish you. Now, there is no nation state that would put up with that. Whether that would put up with that. whether they were a that would put up with that. Whether they were a tiny little Caribbean nation in the middle of the Pacific, America, China or Britain, France wouldn’t put up with being told that by the EU if they were outside the EU, so it is impossible for the Prime Minister to give on that. It’s impossible for the Prime Minister to agree the European Court of impossible for the Prime Minister to agree the European Court ofJustice agree the European Court of justice should agree the European Court ofJustice should have the final say on issues dispute. It’s impossible for us to 55V dispute. It’s impossible for us to say yes, of course we don’t have any rights over our own fishing. These are fundamental principles and if are fundamental principlas and if the EU are fundamental principles and if the EU is demanding we give up on those fundamental principles, I’m those fundamental principlas, I’m afraid those fundamental principles, I’m afraid Adeel will not be done. If there is a cost to that, so be it. Not my ideal but if that is the case Not my ideal but if that is the use I would Not my ideal but if that is the case I would rather stick with the principlas I would rather stick with the principles that we are an independent nation state and we should be treated like that and not as a naughty school child that needs to be punished. You say that you are the only person who voted here. I will remind you we had the Government here who Government here who campaigned to take us out of Brexit and the EU so you are not entirely alone. I’m pretty sure. You have your hand up, Stephen? why pretty sure. You have your hand up, Stephen? Why can the Government not Stephen? why ran the Government not explained to Stephen? Why can the Government not explained to the people of great Britain what being out of Europe actually means? And what is the real impact of no Deal? Surely, no Deal might be better than a raw deal based on what Europe thinks. Do you want us to talk the implications of no Deal versus a thin deal, perhaps? The first thing I will say, I have a degree of respect for what The first thing I will say, I have a degree of respect for whatJulia degree of respect for whatjulia said. degree of respect for whatJulia said. There is a political principle. If there is an economic price to be paid, I will pay it, that’s fine. What frustrates me that’s fine. what frustrates me around that’s fine. What frustrates me around the debate around Brexit as many people who say we can leave many people who say we ran leave with no many people who say we can leave with no Deal and it won’t have consequences, that is simply not tme. It consequences, that is simply not true. It has enormous consequences. tme. It has enormous consequences. Even leaving with true. It has enormous consequences. Even leaving with a deal has consequences because it affects our trade. Without a deal means trade. without a deal means everything trade. Without a deal means everything from cheques and tariffs, which means price rises for foodstuffs coming from the continent, it will mean bigger tailbacks. It will have a very profound impact on how our economy works, how easy it is to trade with the European Union fostered going back to julia, the European Union fostered going back toJulia, if the European Union fostered going back to Julie, if you say ultimately back to julia, if you say ultimately I want to back to Julie, if you say ultimately I want to be sovereign and I back toJulia, if you say ultimately I want to be sovereign and I mean they can’t tell me what to do and I will pay the price, that is absolutely fine. But one other thing is that were striking to me is when the Chancellor made his statement recently was that even though the OBR documents he drew on talked about a A% impact on the economy of about a 496 impact on the economy of Brexit about a A% impact on the economy of Brexit with no Deal and 2% more if Brexit with no Deal and 296 more if we have Brexit with no Deal and 2% more if we have no Deal chose not to mention Brexit at all. I would have thought that if you are planning for something this big, and let’s face it, it has to be big or it wouldn’t have been worth the hassle. If you are planning to something this big, the Government would say, these are the impacts, this is what will happen, this is how we will prepare and ultimately it will be worth it but there is no planning or preparation and that I find mystifying. Let’s hear a bit more from our audience. Susan? mystifying. Let’s hear a bit more from ouraudience. Susan? I mystifying. Let’s hear a bit more from our audience. Susan? I get confused by the deal or no deal. From the moment we left or decided to leave, the deal on the table was the WTO terms in the absence of anything else. So that is the deal and I think we never lost our sovereignty by being in the EU and we were much stronger at the table, formulating the single market and formulating the singla market and working with formulating the single market and working with it, which seems to have had tremendous advantages the small, medium and the big corporates in our country. So medium and the big corporates in our country. Sol medium and the big corporates in our country. So Ijust about old enough remember going into the EU and now we have come out and I only saw, growing up, I only ever saw advantages in my life to being in the EU. Tony? Thank you. It’s really nice to hear julia’s the EU. Tony? Thank you. It’s really nice to hearJulia’s comments, nice to hear julia’s comments, actually. For nice to hearJulia’s comments, actually. For me, it’s a question of sovereignty. I will freely admit I voted to leave, not because of what was said on the side of a bus or promises that were made by British politicians but absolutely it is a question of sovereignty. If that is lost through any deal that is made in the next few days, I think that will be a sad move. Vince? I was a Remainer but I changed my mind when I saw the level of bullying from Brussels and that we do seem to be Bmssels and that we do seem to be very much Brussels and that we do seem to be very much dominated. I would like to ask everybody, really, whether they are of the opinion that the EU wants it to her Britain and they actually want to demonstrate that other countries shouldn’t begin to think about this because it will really, really hurt? David? Yes, a question for Malcolm in Australia. It was interesting to hear that he was talking down the deal the Australians have. We have always been told that we can always fall been told that we ran always fall back on been told that we can always fall back on an Australian stroke Canadian deal as though it is some form of second class. I am surprised Malcolm says it is a second—class Malcolm says it is a second-class deal. I Malcolm says it is a second—class deal. I was expecting him to beef it up. You were Prime Minister, Sir, are you telling me you couldn’t get a deal with the EU? I will come to you in a minute Wes Streeting, but Malcolm? Sure, the reality is the European Union has got along history of protectionism. You would understand that. The trade deals are very hard to negotiate. You know, Britain, the minute Britain pulled out, the minute the Brexit vote occurred I said publicly, we will do a free trade deal with the UK. Negotiations are still continuing, I hope they will be satisfactorily resolved but there are plenty of points and issues, the protection of British agriculture from Australian imports being a very large issue. But I am hopeful that we will be able to get a deal done. Look, believe me, we do not have a trade deal with the European Union per se. We trade on World Trade Organization terms and we are seeking to achieve a free trade agreement. Look, just with respect to what a free trade agreement. Look, just with respect to whatJulia said, it with respect to whatjulia said, it is not for with respect to whatJulia said, it is not for me to litigate Brexit. You guys have got to make your own decisions. The issue, however, is that there will. .. decisions. The issue, however, is that there will... It decisions. The issue, however, is that there will. .. It will come decisions. The issue, however, is that there will... It will come with an economic cost, at least in the short and medium term. I think what julia said is that short and medium term. I think what Julia said is that she voted for julia said is that she voted for Brexit Julia said is that she voted for Brexit and was prepared to pay that cost. I think what was a pity, a real pity, is when the referendum was held, there wasn’t any clear or objective or authoritative understanding of what their economic cost would be. So, in a sense, the British people were being asked to give an informed consent. But, you know, the reality is the die is fast, so I’m know, the reality is the die is cast, so I’m afraid to say, however, fast, so I’m afraid to say, however, that we are living cast, so I’m afraid to say, however, that we are living in a time of rising protectionism. You know, the global sentiment tends swing from free trade to protectionism and it’s been swinging back in the area of protectionism for a while. There is one bit of good news I can give you, one bit of good news I ran give you, though, which is one bit of good news I can give you, though, which is when Donald Trump though, which is when Donald Tmmp pulled out of though, which is when Donald Trump pulled out of the transpacific partnership, I managed to keep that deal alive without America, which was quite an unlikely prospect but we got it done. That trade deal therefore is alive and in force and I hope the United Kingdom will therefore is alive and in force and I hope the United Kingdom willjoin I hope the United Kingdom will join that and I hope the United Kingdom willjoin that and I have no doubt that the Australian government will support that. So, you know, if you do end up joining the TPP, your Aussie mates will have given you a very good hand in keeping that deal alive, so that it ran be in keeping that deal alive, so that it can bejoined. And indeed I hope it ran be joined. And indeed I hope that it can bejoined. And indeed I hope that America rejoins it. But Biden has a different approach to trade historically than Trump but protectionism per se has really risen as a political sentiment in the United States and around the world. You know, it’s not... This is a... You’ve world. You know, it’s not... This is 3... You’ve chosen a very courageous a... You’ve chosen a very courageous time to leave 3... You’ve chosen a very courageous time to leave the largest free a... You’ve chosen a very courageous time to leave the largest free trade zone in the world. Sounds like listening to Malcolm we picked the wrong form Australian Prime Minister to advise the Board of trade but seriously, we are potentially days away from or no deal scenario that I don’t think any of us want to see. If anyone on the EU side of the talks, by the way, thinks that this would be consequence free for our friends and partners over the channel on the European continent or our friends in the Republic of Ireland, they are sorely mistaken. There’s a lot riding on this on both sides of the negotiations, lots of people’s jobs and livelihoods, the collective and livelihoods, the collactive security of and livelihoods, the collective security of our country and our friends across the European Union. I want to see the government get a deal and I desperately hope, by the way, that deal and I desperately hope, by the way, thatJuliet is right and some way, that juliet is right and some of this is way, thatJuliet is right and some of this is choreography. I fear, listening to what the Prime Minister has said and what Ursula von der Leyen from the European Union side says, that is not where we are and that should really worry us. I will give practical examples because people don’t like forecasts and predictions but practical example of what that would mean. The chairman of Tesco is currently warning us that prices will go up by 5%. I that prices will go up by 596. I think he that prices will go up by 5%. I think he understands his business, the Prime Minister’s spokesman says he is right, they are telling their customers, myself included, bills are going to go up. What about the unintended consequences? I am Shadow schools minister. In recent weeks, the Department for Education has written to every head teacher in the country and said you need to look at your school food supply chains and make sure you have got long life product in in case there is any product in in use there is any dismption product in in case there is any disruption from January the ist. I dismption from january the 1st. I consider disruption from January the 1st. I consider myself someone who has followed the twists and turns of this quite closely. I would never in a million years have thought no—deal a million years have thought no-deal Brexit a million years have thought no—deal Brexit would mean problems with Brexit would mean problams with school Brexit would mean problems with school food. Whether it is the school food. whether it is the things we school food. Whether it is the things we have been warned about in terms of manufacturing, just—in—time terms of manufacturing, just-in-time sunplv terms of manufacturing, just-in-time supply chains terms of manufacturing, just—in—time supply chains and disruption to jobs supply chains and dismption to jobs and supply chains and disruption to jobs and livelihoods and the debate we have frankly been having for the last four years, or the unintended consequences, the unpredictable. There is so much riding on our political leaders in the next few days to try to put the ideological disagreements to one side and focus on the practical outcomes for the British people and for people right British peopla and for peopla right across British people and for people right across the continent because if no deal was a bad idea in the good times, we are now in the midst, still, of a global pandemic which is not just having still, of a global pandemic which is notjust having a huge impact on not just having a huge impact on people’s notjust having a huge impact on people’s lives but ravaging people’s livelihoods so no deal is not a future we can afford and that is why future we ran afford and that is why so much is riding future we can afford and that is why so much is riding on the exudates. Robert, I want to come to you before we move onto another question in terms of what Malcolm has said. As I said at the beginning of the programme, the Prime Minister has said in effect get ready for an Australia style deal, the chances of a trade deal are not looking particularly good at the moment. Malcolm Turnbull, as you heard, is lukewarm at best about how good an option that would be. Does that not give you pause for thought? I thought what Malcolm said about the rise of protectionism is very interesting and he did say that of course, the tendency within the European bloc is indeed, sadly, whilst it has got a single market whilst it has got a singla market that whilst it has got a single market that works for its members, it tends to put up barriers against other states and it is difficult to negotiate free trade arrangements. So how negotiate free trade arrangements. 50 how optimistic should we be So how optimistic should we be feeling if we have got the Prime Minister saying, let’s go for an Australia style deal, it will be fine and the form Australian prime ministers say it is not great. What ministers say it is not great. what the Prime ministers say it is not great. What the Prime Minister is adhering to the principle of free trade. We know that history teaches us that free trade, open markets is actually the best way to raise living standards and to lift more people out of and to lift more peopla out of poverty. and to lift more people out of poverty. That is what works and it is I think important for this country at this time to stand up and stand firm in favour of that open approach, and all we are saying to our approach, and all we are saying to ourfriends in Europe is, look, we our friends in Europe is, look, we want to ourfriends in Europe is, look, we want to work with you. We are in your neighbourhood, we are your friends, you know, we have been your partners for generations. We just want to change the terms of trade. It is not so difficult to make that task. I It is not so difficult to make that task. Iappeal It is not so difficult to make that task. I appeal to them, to our friends in Europe, to put aside ideology and think of the people who we all jointly ideology and think of the people who we alljointly served, and then I we all jointly served, and then I think we we alljointly served, and then I think we can reach the agreement think we ran reach the agreement that think we can reach the agreement that would be in our common interests, as Wes says, there’s a lot riding on this and there huge disadvantages for our European friends if they don’t come to that sensible deal. You are right to talk about openness but the Prime Minister has got to be open now the public. It is not an Australia deal, did me public. It is not an Australia deal, did WTO terms, let’s spell that out, the government is saying get ready for Brexit to business but get ready for what? for Brexit to business but get ready forwhat? Is for Brexit to business but get ready for what? Is it going to be a deal or no deal? We are days away from the 1st of January. Whose fault is the 1st of january. whose fault is that? I’m the 1st of January. Whose fault is that? I’m not going to say it is the lst of January. Whose fault is that? I’m not going to say it is all of the UK Government side, it takes two to tango but these issues are not new, right? This is not new and the issues that are currently being laid on the table as the barriers are entirely predictable. They’ve are entirely predictable. Therve been are entirely predictable. They’ve been the centre of the debate for years and the Prime Minister promised an oven ready deal. It is dearty not. The promised an oven ready deal. It is clearly not. The other and ready dearty not. The other and ready deal was clearly not. The other and ready deal was the withdrawn agreement. They have already said that. It was in the manifesto it was the withdrawn agreement. We are preparing for all eventualities, it is wrong to say we are somehow sitting back and not doing anything for we have invested £750 billion into border technology, we have been preparing for this by making sure sunplv preparing for this by making sure supply chains are resilient in all our public services. This is the work of a government that has been going on not work of a government that has been going on notjust for the last few going on not just for the last few months going on notjust for the last few months but for the last 18 months since Boris months but for the last 18 months since BorisJohnson became Prime since Boris johnson became Prime Minister. since BorisJohnson became Prime Minister. I assure you, I’ve been in Minister. Iassure you, I’ve been in the Minister. I assure you, I’ve been in the committee rooms. I Minister. I assure you, I’ve been in the committee rooms. Ijust want to let Malcolm in because he can’t the committee rooms. Ijust want to let Malcolm in because he can’tjump let Malcolm in because he can’t jump in quite as let Malcolm in because he can’tjump in quite as easily as you and he’s had his hand up, Malcolm? Thanks, Fiona, ran I had his hand up, Malcolm? Thanks, Fiona, ran Ijust had his hand up, Malcolm? Thanks, Fiona, can Ijust inject an air of Fiona, ran Ijust inject an air of perhaps Fiona, can Ijust inject an air of perhaps perhaps objective realism here. There’s an old political saying in Australia, in the great race of life, always back self—interest, because you know it self-interest, because you know it is trying. The self—interest, because you know it is trying. The reality is, Robert is right when he makes the point that trade benefits both sides, and so, you know, the Europeans have an interest in having a good trading relationship with Britain. I mean, they don’t want to suddenly freeze Britain out. They don’t buy British goods because they particularly like goods because they particularty like the goods because they particularly like the British, or... It is a financial, commercial the British, or... It is a financial, commercialthing. financial, commercial thing. However, here financial, commercialthing. However, here is the point of reality. There is always a market for protectionism politically. Politicians will always get applauded when they support or protect local industries, particularly those that are influential. Now, Julia can say, oh, inﬂuential. Now, julia ran say, oh, the Europeans influential. Now, Julia can say, oh, the Europeans are punishing us by not giving us a good enough deal. I mean, that is not giving us a good enough deal. I mean, that isjust not giving us a good enough deal. I mean, that is just not right. They are acting in their own rational self interest. The British government, in its negotiations on an Australian free—trade agreement, an Australian free-trade agreement, and I have an Australian free—trade agreement, and I have to say, Simon Birmingham and Liz Tmss, and I have to say, Simon Birmingham and Liz Truss, the respective trade and Liz Tmss, the respective trade ministers, are and Liz Truss, the respective trade ministers, are doing an outstanding job and working on that, but we know, we are big agricultural exporters, we are very low cost producers of agricultural products. We know that Britain is not going to suddenly say, right, no barriers to Australian imports you know, of beef, lamb, etc. They are not going to do that because they’re farmers, to do that because therre farmers, politically, to do that because they’re farmers, politically, the farmers could not compete and politically, that is not going to be acceptable. 50 the going to be acceptabla. So the question is, going to be acceptable. 50 the question is, how much additional access do we get to the European market? So it is not a question of punishing or anything like that. What it punishing or anything like that. what it is, punishing or anything like that. What it is, is people pursue their what it is, is peopla pursue their own What it is, is people pursue their own interest and when you step out of a free trade zone, where there are no barriers, suddenly, people in France, Germany and elsewhere will be saying, 0K, France, Germany and elsewhere will be saying, OK, the Brits have stepped out, how does it benefit us to give our firms and businesses and farmers an edge over the ones in Britain? You know what? The British government will be doing exactly the same thing with other countries. You know, it is a big, brave world out there, and you know, I have huge confidence in Britain. I think you will do brilliantly but it is going... But you have to be clearer about it and recognise there will be an economic cost and then you have got to come you know, sales force and do your best in a very competitive environment. 0K, we could obviously talk about this for a long time but there’s other questions I want to get into tonight and before I go ahead to the next question, I want to mention that we’re starting a new kind of audience next year, starting on the 7th of january, audience next year, starting on the 7th ofJanuary, until we can get 7th of january, until we ran get back on 7th ofJanuary, until we can get back on the road again and have peopla in the back on the road again and have people in the studio with us, I peopla in the studio with us, I can’t people in the studio with us, I can’t wait for that but it might be some time. We are looking for 50 peopla from some time. We are looking for 50 people from across the whole of the peopla from across the whola of the UK and people from across the whole of the UK and each week we will take the audience from the pre—selected group audience from the pre-selected group of 50. We audience from the pre—selected group of 50. We are calling it the QT 50. of 50. We are calling it the OT 50. It means you of 50. We are calling it the QT 50. It means you might be on quite often and you need to be free most Thursday of course. Hopefully you will have plenty of things to say. will have planty of things to say. Get in will have plenty of things to say. Get in touch, go to the website and you ran find out Get in touch, go to the website and you can find out more about that and you ran find out more about that and we would you can find out more about that and we would love to see you and hopefully I will see some of you on the programme next year. There we are. Let’s take our next question. Martin Beckwith Brown. The Covid virus does not have legs walking around looking for victims. The growth in infections, hospitalisations and subsequent deaths is due to many not following the guidelines correctly. Shouldn’t people be taking more personal responsibility to safeguard others? ﬂ Iimagine you I imagine you are asking this question because you have experience of this or because it is something that particularly irritate you? that particularty irritate you? Both, that particularly irritate you? Both, actually! It is everywhere you look. I hear reports on the TV and elsewhere, oh, it is a minority, but the trouble is, you don’t have to the troubla is, you don’t have to relax too the trouble is, you don’t have to relax too much to create the problem. You know, in Essex, we have been historically quite low and it is starting to go through the roof. And... Peopla, is starting to go through the roof. And... People, you know, I is starting to go through the roof. And... People, you know, Iwas in a And... Peopla, you know, Iwas in a supermarket this And... People, you know, Iwas in a supermarket this morning and there were... 0K, there were only two or three people without masks but there were still three people without masks and they were young, fit people. We know that there are people going in and out of homes, I even talk to publicans, and they say even talk to public-ans, and they say in the area, even talk to publicans, and they say in the area, there are pubs that are not following the rules and they are not following the mles and they are upset not following the rules and they are upset because they are doing the right thing and losing trade. 0K, right thing and losing trade. OK, let’s take to the panel, Wes, we have seen the Health Secretary talking today about infections rising, particular in areas of the south—east so should people take south-east so should peopla take more south—east so should people take more responsibility? Yes, this is a really big constituency for me, lots of you will know my constituency, of the North, is on the London Essex the North, is on the London Fssex border the North, is on the London Essex border and we’ve got some of the highest infection rates London, our part of London and Essex has rates rising at this week hospitals in my community have the numbers of deaths unlike that which they have seen since the first peak. We can’t be complacent about this. The fact the vaccine is being rolled out is of course a huge relief, not least for those of us who are desperate for many of our own family members to get the vaccine where they are older, more vulnerable, so we can’t older, more vulnerabla, so we can’t wait for older, more vulnerable, so we can’t wait for that but we have come so far, we have made so many sacrifices, let’s not throw it away at this late stage. Let’s exercise in personal responsibility, take rare, look in personal responsibility, take care, look out for each other and rare, look out for each other and make sure care, look out for each other and make sure we get through this pandemic as well as possible. There are lots of people in this country are lots of peopla in this country who are lots of people in this country who have had covert micro who are still suffering from Long Covid symptoms and let’s not forget as we approach Christmas, over 60,000 peopla have approach Christmas, over 60,000 people have died during this peopla have died during this pandemic people have died during this pandemic and for lots of families, this is going to be a really hard Christmas when they are missing peopla for Christmas when they are missing people for the first time around peopla for the first time around Christmas, people for the first time around Christmas, so let’s keep all of that in mind and do the right thing, follow the rules, look out for ourselves and each other, knowing the vaccine is being rolled out and we ran the vaccine is being rolled out and we can look hopefully to a brighter we ran look hopefully to a brighter year in 2021. we can look hopefully to a brighter year in 2021. Julia? Yes, I think year in 2021. julia? Yes, Ithink peopla should year in 2021. Julia? Yes, I think people should take more personal responsibility but I would like that to be in place of having restrictions on people’s right to use their personal restrictions on people’s right to use their personaljudgment and common sense. The Prime Minister has constantly talked about good old British common sense and personal responsibility. So how would that work in practice? That would work in practice in that we would trust that peopla will practice in that we would trust that people will do the right thing because most people have actually been following the rules. Martin mentions that a few people aren’t wearing masks. We don’t know the reason why those people weren’t wearing masks and I see people on wearing masks and I see peopla on the tube wearing masks and I see people on the tube everyday, odd people not wearing masks but the vast majority are. The vast majority of publicans are. The vast majority of public-ans and are. The vast majority of publicans and restaurants and shops, people and restaurants and shops, peopla going into and restaurants and shops, people going into them, people are going going into them, peopla are going about going into them, people are going about their daily lives and their workplaces are doing very sensible things. They are doing it because they want to keep themselves, their colleagues, their they want to keep themselves, their colleagues, theirfamily members they want to keep themselves, their colleagues, their family members and friends, people they pass in the street, they want to keep them safe. wire street, they want to keep them safe. Wire infections rising then? Because wire infections rising then? Because we have Wire infections rising then? Because we have a virus which is now endemic and if you look at the patterns of this pandemic, in every single country in the world, where there you compare Sweden, which did not have a formal lockdown at all and did rely on personal responsibility, or Peru, which locked down for months and months on end, not even allowing men and women out of their homes on the same day, we have seen exactly the same curve, the areas where we are seeing the virus rise in infection rates at the moment are the areas that were not hit back in the spring before we locked down. We are in the winter months. It is rising in London and London was very badly hit? In the borough that were not badly hit before the lockdown, if you look at the actual granular data, it is rising only in areas, favouring, for instance, it is not rising at very large levels anywhere else that was hit much earlier in else that was hit much eartier in the year. The else that was hit much earlier in the year. The reality is that we have got a vaccine, we should be making sure we are absolutely protecting the vulnerable, those who are over 70, under 70, protecting the vulnerable, those who are over70, under70, with are over 70, under 70, with undertying are over70, under70, with underlying health conditions, but in undertying health conditions, but in my view we underlying health conditions, but in my view we should not be having restrictions on shops opening or closing, on pubs or restaurants, there is no evidence whatsoever that any of these particular places are causing a rise in infections. On the contrary, lots of evidence that when you have a lockdown, as Wales did, you have a lockdown, as Walas did, and are you have a lockdown, as Wales did, and are planning to again, or when you have a lockdown as England did, for four weeks, you have a lockdown as England did, forfour weeks, you end up for four weeks, you end up increasing forfour weeks, you end up increasing the problem afterwards. They don’t solve anything or break any circuits or any fires, all they do is delay the problem. I think we should rely on adults in this country and trust their personal judgment about keeping themselves and other people safe and as they and other peopla safe and as they have and other people safe and as they have been doing anyway, and allow peopla to go have been doing anyway, and allow people to go about their normal peopla to go about their normal daily lives as people to go about their normal daily lives as much as possible. Anand. Obviously, people should take Anand. Obviously, peopla should take responsibility Anand. Obviously, people should take responsibility for themselves and others and there’s been some really interesting survey data from you because that showed the majority of people who said they would take a peopla who said they would take a vaccine people who said they would take a vaccine would take it not because the government told them so but because they thought it would help others. I think that is community spirit that exists in this country. I disagree withJulia on the lockdown and it is interesting that in the last week of November, the 21st of the 27th, that the death toll failed... That was a leg from the infections, the infection rate went down before we went into lockdown, that is official ONS data. It is not, I don’t think... The death rate went down, as it always does, with the time—lag from the infection rates going down. The same for the first lockdown, the infection rate was going down before we went into lockdown. Over the two weeks before the English lockdown was announced, on the 31st of October, cases rose by 29%, hospitalisations rose by 50%, deaths rose by 137%. The data that was given out, the data that was used has since been gone through and even at the time, that was being questioned. The data that was used at that time was already weeks out of date. Yes, but the cases were still rising. The cases were rising at a lower rate. No, they weren’t doing that... 0K, sojust to be clear, they were rising. The rate of increase was slowing, it was actually already levelling off and going down in some areas before we went into lockdown. That is official data. Anand, I will let you finish your point. 0K, we could trace the defence but I think there are other aspects to this than people doing what is common sense. I mean, I don’t understand what common sense is but I think there’s a real important role for government here and I think there are several things to be said. One, the government has to be clear and consistent in its messaging. Now, what the Welsh case shows me is not that lockdown doesn’t work. It is just that if you lockdown then open the taps, everyone floods out again and itjust leads to more rises in infections. You need to be steady and gradual about these things. There is a bit of a tendency at the moment to say, don’t worry, at Christmas we can all go out and that, you know, as we have from Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance yesterday in Parliament, is possibly going to lead to an increase in cases inJanuary. So we need to think carefully through what government strategy is. And the final thing is, the guidelines need to be clear and those in power need to be shown to be respecting them as well. You know, I don’t want to harp on about this but the damage done by the Barnard Castle trip, because the moment that people think, "Either that lot aren’t listening to the rules, or actually, the rules are a bit silly", Scotch eggs in pubs, and actually, once you start thinking the rules are silly, then the whole thing starts to fray at the edges. Well, what if you allow government to tell you what you can and can’t eat and where you can and can’t eat in a free country, that gets a bit silly, too. Well, let’s hear from the audience because there’s lots of hands up and I would like to hear from you. Chﬂs? Thank you. It seems to me that... We have proven already that common sense doesn’t work so I think we need to take a different approach. And why not to be a lot more granular about it? Rather than going countywide or even countrywide in the case of Wales, why don’t we focus on the areas where it is really happening? So in Basildon, for example, which is the case that is being cited in Essex at the moment, it is not throughout Basildon that there’s the problem, it is in certain areas, so why don’t we just attacked those areas? Diane? I actually think that the government’s policy on Christmas is ludicrous. We are all going to get together, well, I’m personally not, we’re not, and people, families are going to get together, have a drink, cuddle each other when they should not be cuddling each other, and doesjulia really think that we are not going to have a lockdown after Christmas? I am sure we will. Jimmy? Thank you. I think there’s a degree of conformity fatigue with a lot of people, and the problem is that the message has been so blurred and so varied over such along period of time, that now, conspiracy theories have a lot more gravity and they have a lot more attachment than they would ordinarily. I think people are looking for an opportunity to not conform any longer. People are tired of it. That’s largely because of the mixed messages and the flip—flopping that has been done I think from the government. And Malcolm, Australia took a different path to the UK in a number of ways, in terms of dealing with a lockdown. Where do you stand in terms ofJulia’s let people take their own responsibility for it versus the role of the government? Well, I think the government has got a huge role. We are a Federation, so national, federal government, six states and two territories. Much of the heavy lifting was done at the state and territory level, so a number of the... Excuse me, a number of the states actually closed their borders. In fact, at different times, all the states closed their borders against other states. We had a much... I think we went harder on lockdowns and in particular, on the borders, the international borders, sooner, than many other countries did including the UK. And you know, the reality is, I mean, this is a very complex area and I don’t want to oversimplify but it is obvious that this is a highly infectious disease. And so, the more... The way to stop it spreading, as the gentleman from the audience said, it does not have arms and legs, it is spread by people, you have got to have social distancing, you have got to wear masks. The sooner you can impose those measures, the less transmission you will get. Australia has had a relatively good experience. We really... You know, we sympathise with the rough time the British people are going through, and you know, we wish you all the best, we wish there was something we could do to help from this end and I hope that vaccines are distributed as rapidly as possible, but I think what we have learned globally from this pandemic is that early action is best. You know, the proposition that people should just be free to do whatever they like is pretty naive, frankly. It sounds good as a political sound bite but it does not work out very well in the intensive care unit. And Malcolm, can I ask you... Interestingly, the country that has done the best of all is Taiwan. Can Ijustjump infora minute? Sure. You say acting quickly was critical for Australia. Do you think the UK Government acted too slowly? Well, it did not act as quickly as Australia did. Ultimately, Fiona, every country in the world, you know, at similar stages of development, is dealing with the same issues, you know, Robert is dealing with the same justice issues as his Australian counterparts are, as his French counterparts are, and so forth. What is interesting about the pandemic, it is like an old—fashioned examination. I mean, every country in the world had to face exactly the same problem at exactly the same time. It was like being in the examination hall, where the invigilator says," Right, it is nine o’clock, you can start writing, you’ve got three hours". And so, we can actually test in real time what approaches worked best. And I think a key thing, of course, there are cultural issues, obviously, the more trust and confidence people have in the government, the better, the more likely they are to take guidance from the government. The point Anand made about leadership and consistency is a very powerful one. So, you know, I think the reality is, social distancing, masks, all of those old techniques that have been around for centuries, probably millennia as well, have been the most effective. Robert. Well, here we are, towards the end of an extraordinary year, having been in a position of responsibility throughout this crisis, I can tell you that Malcolm’s characterisation of it being one giant exam question is probably a very good one. I think, like all other governments in the world, we have had to learn on the job. And what mark would you give the government? If it is an exam? I’m not going to start marking the government because we are not out of the woods yet. We are still in a position where this virus is very much in our community. The vaccine has started to arrive. That’s great but we can’t take our foot off the pedal. We have got to keep dealing with this problem, wherever we see it. And what about Diane’s point about she thinks it is ridiculous that people are being allowed to get together at Christmas? I think it was right of us to recognise that Christmas is a particularty important time of the year. I think within that, a lot of people, a lot of families, are making decisions and I’m, certainly from my expense, talking to lots of families who are going to exercise restraint. Here’s that thing: I think there is clearly a role for government in setting a plan. We have the Covid winter plan that did notjust involve a lockdown, it involved a return to different tiers, which I think was very important, rather than just letting everything hang out after the end of the lockdown. I think that will help make a difference. But at the same time, this is not just about government activity, it is about each and every one of us and government... Yes, trust is a big issue but government has to show that it trusts people as well and that is why I think it is important that in terms of the messaging that we give out, that we don’t sound ineffectively authoritarian. In other words, we don’t become too shrill and we don’t become too didactic because we could not achieve the progress that we have done without the cooperation and the solidarity of the people of this country — all of us have played our part in dealing with this virus, and the government trusts people to do the right thing. We have a regime in place to deal with those cases where people are behaving in a way that is clearly irresponsible and we have seen a lot of fines being issued, a lot of enforcement action. It did not work with Dominic Cummings, though, did it? Well, look, I take the point about personal responsibility, personal examples. I think that episodes like that, whether it is people who at some point have been involved in politics, no more, but you know, celebrities and other people, it is clearly having an impact on all of us. So, do you think he did break the guidelines, then? Of course he did. And it was one rule for him and another for everyone else. It was an absolute outrage. It was a deeply unfortunate episode, there is no doubt about that and it didn’t help when it came to creating a consistent message. But I think one of the contributors making this point about fatigue and about people feeling this is an awfully long road, we have got to understand that as well. And that is why the messages about the end of the tunnel, the vaccine, what we still need to do in order to deal with this problem, because social distancing will be with us for a considerable period of time, all these messages I think actually are well understood by the majority of the British people. I trust them to do the right thing and I know together... You don’t trust them, that’s a lie, I’m sorry, you don’t trust them to do the right thing otherwise you wouldn’t decide who they can and cannot go to the pub with, who they can and cannot have in their home, whether they can be on their patio or not, their patio, which tear they are in. It is absolute nonsense, for this government to claim you don’t want to be to dramatic... Julia, we haven’t got the police in everybody’s home... You are policing people’s homes... We have not. Right now, we are policing people’s homes. You have sacked half of the police over the last ten years. Well, we are recruiting thousands more as we speak. You think if I had my family, if I had people from outside my immediate family from my house in my home tomorrow night that I would still have myjob the next day? I doubt it. Julia, if we took your approach, then the NHS would be overwhelmed. No, it wouldn’t. One of the biggest factors in the decision—making... So you are saying you don’t trust the British people. Forgive me, I was involved... When you say you do trust the British people, but if we do not have the rules telling people who we can and can’t see and where we can go... Let him answer. I was involved in the decision—making and I saw the figures rising... You just contradicted yourself. Problems with the NHS, capacity in our hospitals. I certainly was not going to preside as a minister over a disaster in our NHS. That was absolutely out of the question, we would have failed the British people. Throughout this, we have protected our health service. The NHS has been long protected. And make sure that it has been able to work throughout this crisis. OK, let’s take another question from Janine Sawyer. Good evening. Footballers at Millwall and Colchester were booed for taking the knee in support of Black Lives Matter on Saturday. A government minister, when interviewed on Sunday, did not unequivocally condemn the fans. Should more have been said by both the politicians and the clubs in support of the players? Let’s be clear, you are referring to George Eustice, are you, Janine, in terms of government ministers? Let’s just be clear exactly what George Eustice did say, Robert. I wonder if you want to clarify what the position is. I’m sorry, I did not catch fully what George said about that. George Eustice talked about Black Lives Matter, with capital letters, he certainly talked about that, Janine, I think that is what you are referring to. Anand? I think it was wrong to boo the players. Let me start on the other side of the argument... Do you think they were right to take the knee? Yeah, I think players can do... If that is how they want to show their support for trying to get rid of racism in sport... Look, I get irritated when I’m watching football and the Black Lives Matter logo comes across the top. I don’t like being force fed what I should think, even if I agree with it. I don’t like being told I have to wear a poppy. I don’t like people telling me what I should think, 0K? It irritates me. I also think that there’s a lot of virtue signalling, particularly by corporates, you actually don’t do very much for sort of inequality or prejudice or that in their day—to—day practices but stick a logo on their site to make themselves feel better. There are all sorts of problems with this, but it was wrong to boo for several reasons. One, because it isjust rude. I think the players who kneel are kneeling because they want to make a statement about racism. I simply don’t believe that the players believe in a movement that wants to undermine capitalism. I think they are trying to show respect and to make a stand against racism and I think booing that is unpleasant. And I think also that if a bit of hectoring by the TV companies is a pretty small price to pay for sport at long, long last doing something about this. I remember as a kid watching football with my dad and you would hear the monkey noises. And the commentators would not say a word. We were sitting there going, "Are you not going to say what is going on on the telly?" They would not say anything. TV has a pretty sordid past when it comes to racism in sport. I think they are probably overcompensating and over virtue signalling now but I would far rather that than where we came from and it is a step in the right direction though only a step. Recognising racism is the first step. Dealing with it, dealing with prejudice of all kinds, dealing with prejudice against people of a different colour, 3 different sexual orientation, of a different class, all of that exists in our society and we need to go beyond kneeling to acting. And Robert, just to be clear, I thought you would be across this but George Eustice was played the clip on TV of what happened at Millwall and he said he could not hear it terribly well but he did say that if players want to take the knee, that should be are respected. In terms of the question from Janine, have football clubs, have politicians done enough? No, and I think Anand’s point about endemic, tolerated and accepted racism in football and in other sport is sadly well documented and it is not over yet. I think if people want to make that sort of demonstration and that gesture, then they should be respected. But I think Anand is right as well that it is no good just putting slogans up and trying to convince people that somehow that is going to be enough. It is up to all of us in our conduct, what we do, to not just talk about the characteristics and the issues but to go beyond that and look at the people whose lives are affected by this because there will be other circumstances that will accompany a lot of this, that creates the barriers that have to be removed. And therefore, absolutely, booing of that is disrespectful, it is rude and intimidatory and unacceptable but at the same time, we all need to be free to make our own contribution and do things in our own way if we are really going to combat and overcome some of the barriers and prejudices that still exist in society. Mark? Thank you, Fiona. Yes, I was obviously upset about the booing. What I don’t understand is, when they are going to start booing, afterwards, they are going to start cheering the same players that scored a goalfor them. And coming back, I know you don’t like coming back but I was a bit discombobulated aboutJulia’s comment about the small Caribbean islands. Ijust wanted to know what she was on about then. It was a comment regarding whether you were America or China or a small Caribbean island, ie, a small nation state without much power. Phil? I was just going to add, I think in terms of player support, last night or the night before, there was a game in Europe where two teams walked off the field in protest about a racist comment made by one of the officials, so I think it does go beyond just taking the knee now. Martin? Yeah, I mean, Istill remember Martin Luther King and so this topic started even before then, as we know, and it is still raging on. Ijust don’t know how we get away from this almost tribal view of other people, especially when, the point that Anand made about he does not like to be told what to think and I think a lot of people feel like that, whether it is right or wrong. Steve 7 I am totally against any form of racism. I think it is just intolerable. And it always has been. But I do feel that taking the knee might be becoming past its sell by date, shall we say, at football matches, inasmuch as, yes, everyone is doing it. Look at F1, look at the grid before each Grand Prix and they have the Black Lives Matter moment there. Half the drivers don’t kneel. They stand and respect the moment. I honestly think, if you look at what is going on within football and other sports with racism, I think it has got to the stage now where the clubs have got to be more accountable for their fans’ behaviour. I know, I have been to football matches where you hear it on the tannoy, and it says to you, "If you hear a racist comment, please report it to a steward." You can sit at a London derby and you can hear racist protests aplenty. You tell the steward and they just walk away. There has got to be a much harder, firmer line on it than just, you know, sort of like taking the knee or saying that we won’t tolerate racism. We have got to actually physically kick it out. Julia, let me take you back to the original question, talking about the footballers at Millwall and Colchester who were booed for taking the knee. Yeah. In support of Black Lives Matter. Was enough done by politicians and football teams? What action should they do? If people are allowed to make their gesture of taking the knee, surely the fans are allowed their gesture back? I don’t actually approve of either. Right, so hang on, are you saying that it was fair enough that the fans were booing the players? It’s a free country. The fans are allowed to boo. It is not something I would have done myself. That said, I don’t think that the players should now or should ever have been taking the knee. I think people were desperate for football and sport generally to come back after the lockdown and desperate for some escapism from the politics, from the difficulty of daily life, and they would like to have politics separate from football and they did not want it brought in. Look, I think it is absurd that we should even need to say, of course, we don’t want racism, of course, we abhor racism, of course we don’t want it in football... So when black players feel it is important to take the knee, you think they shouldn’t be taking the knee? I don’t... We don’t allow political demonstrations of any other kind, other than the wearing of the poppy, in football matches and we do that for a very good reason, and this was a political demonstration. The players originally, when they started Premier League matches, had Black Lives Matter written on their shirts, the slogan of a now—political organisation. Regardless of the Marxist defund the police aims of the organisation, I think it is quite bizarre that the only demonstration that happens at the beginning of our football matches should be a demonstration in relation to the horrific racist murder of a black man in America, many months ago. It is not something that happened in this country. anyone in this country would endorse or ever say was acceptable. I find it strange that that is the one thing. I am looking forward to those same footballers showing the same principles when for instance many of them will be playing for England in the Qatar World Cup. When they go to Qatar, will they be taking a knee for all the women who have no real legal rights and the violence that goes against them? Will they take a knee for all of the gay people who are imprisoned or even executed for being gay? Why are we choosing this one horrific, terrible act of injustice and violence as the one issue that we are expected to have a political demonstration of every aingle week? I think we can all agree it was a horrific murder, we don’t want it to happen, there needs to be more to tackle police violence, there needs to be more to tackle racism in sport and in football in particular but I don’t feel the need, and I think a lot of fans feel the same way, to have a demonstration and a gesture about it every single match. Wes 7 I will come to you in a minute, Anand, but Wes. Sometimes, things happen in history that are so shocking and so brutal that it forces a conversation and opens up an opportunity to shift the dial in a positive direction and change deep, ingrained, endemic problems which plague societies. The murder of George Floyd on camera in front of the eyes of notjust America but the eyes of the world opened up such a conversation. Racism is not new in this country or the United States of America. And on a number of levels, of course, racism in this country is very different than it was in the 19805 when I was born, or the 19505 and 19605. We don’t have signs up any longer that say "No blacks, no dogs, no Irish.‘ But hate crime remains a problem and is on the increase in too many cases. Indirect discrimination, whether through education, employment, criminaljustice, that remains a problem, too. When Millwall footballers decided to take the knee, nobody thinks that it was some kind of Marxist protest. No one thinks that it was about defunding the police. What it was about was saying, "We are not going to be bystanders to racism and we think this conversation is important, and we, footballers, with fans and a following, are going to use our platform to say something about it and encourage you tojoin in". Let’s not pretend that the booing of those players was anything other than a racist response to an antiracist protest. And let’s also... Can Ijust say, in fairness, I have to say, whether you agree with it or not that the Millwall supporters club has said that the booing was not motivated by racism, they were doing it in reaction to the taking down of war memorials and the defacing of Winston Churchill statues. Well, let’s not think for a moment that before everybody booed, they all looked at each other, had a little chinwag and decided what the right response... You know, let’s have this kind of conversation and then we will start booing. Come on, let’s get real about this. More positively, at Liverpool, at Anfield, then at Chelsea, Stamford Bridge, people applauded their players and stood with them, and in terms ofJulia’s sort of point, well, what are people supposed to do if they see or hear racism? I know that tackling racism and challenging it, particularly when it is from your own side or within your own tribe or your own team or your own family, can be difficult and uncomfortable, but I bet you it is a hell of a sight less uncomfortable than being those players on the pitch being booed by their own fans or being the black fans on the terrace having to listen to those monkey chants or the banana skins being thrown at players and every other manifestation of racism we see on the pitch, off the pitch, out in the country and in our communities. The problem is notjust racism, it is bystanders to racism and I saulte the players for using their platform and their opportunity to send a message to their fans and supporters and I think most people in this country are anti—racists and would be with them, too. Malcolm Turnbull? Thank you, I think Wes summed it up very well, you’ve got to have zero tolerance for racism. In a multicultural society above all, as Britain is and Australia is, you have got to treat people with respect, mutual respect is the glue that binds our diverse society together. Taking a knee is a perfectly respectful statement. It is a statement about racism. It is a statement against racism. Booing people, in any context, is abuse, let’s be frank, and so, we have had experience here in Australia with fans, some fans, booing aboriginal players, one in particular, Adam Goods, who is a real champion for First Nations peoples here, and first Australians. Look, I think you have just got to have zero tolerance for racism. I honestly can’t improve on what Wes said, I think he summed it up very well. Anand, we’ve not got much time but you want to come on that. I agree with Wes that the killing of George Floyd was a seismic moment that led to a debate that was long overdue that we had. I mean, I shareJulia’s reservations to an extent about it being Black Lives Matter. I don’t understand, to be honest, why it isn’t Kick It Out. But the fundamental issue for me is, you have these incredibly powerful and influential role models, these footballers, who are revered on, you know, as role models, basically saying at the start of every game, "Racism is wrong, don’t do it." And however imperfect it may be, and whatever sort of connotations there might be hanging around the edges, that statement in and of itself should be welcomed. The hour is up. No way! We are going to end it here. Some of you still have your hands up but we’re out of time, I’m afraid. Tonight, our lovely audience came from Chelmsford, thank you forjoining us, our last audience before Christmas and I want to say, don’t forget, wherever you live, do apply if you would like to join the QT 50, our new UK wide audience, and that will start in the New Year. You can do that by going to the Question Time website and following the instructions and who knows, I might be seeing you virtually on our big screen in the New Year. I would love that to be the case. Adrian Chiles is coming up on Question Time Extra Time Adrian Chiles is coming up on Question Time Extra Time with his guests and you can see on the screen how to get in touch, by phone, text or tweet and you can have your say there. For now, I just want to say, before Christmas, for us, thank you very much to the panel for coming tonight. Malcolm, thank you for getting up early in Australia. I should say that Malcolm earlier shared his view of the bay which was pretty gutting for all of us because it has been such a grey day in the UK but thank you very much forjoining us. And of course, the audience in Chelmsford, thank you as well and thank you to you at home for watching. Goodbye.